The Second Book of THE HUNGER GAMES 



New York Times Bestsel ling Author 

SUZHNNE 
COLLINS 



PARTI 
"THE SPARK" 



2 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I clasp the flask between my hands even though the 
warmth from the tea has long since leached into the 
frozen air. My muscles are clenched tight against the 
cold. If a pack of wild dogs were to appear at this 
moment, the odds of scaling a tree before they 
attacked are not in my favor. I should get up, move 
around, and work the stiffness from my limbs. But 
instead I sit, as motionless as the rock beneath me, 
while the dawn begins to lighten the woods. I can't 
fight the sun. I can only watch helplessly as it drags 
me into a day that I've been dreading for months. 

By noon they will all be at my new house in the 
Victor's Village. The reporters, the camera crews, even 
Effie Trinket, my old escort, will have made their way 
to District 12 from the Capitol. I wonder if Effie will 
still be wearing that silly pink wig, or if she'll be 
sporting some other unnatural color especially for the 
Victory Tour. There will be others waiting, too. A staff 
to cater to my every need on the long train trip. A 
prep team to beautify me for public appearances. My 
stylist and friend, Cinna, who designed the gorgeous 
outfits that first made the audience take notice of me 
in the Hunger Games. 

If it were up to me, I would try to forget the Hunger 
Games entirely. Never speak of them. Pretend they 
were nothing but a bad dream. But the Victory Tour 
makes that impossible. Strategically placed almost 
midway between the annual Games, it is the Capitol's 
way of keeping the horror fresh and immediate. Not 
only are we in the districts forced to remember the 
iron grip of the Capitol's power each year, we are 
forced to celebrate it. And this year, I am one of the 



3 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



stars of the show. I will have to travel from district to 
district, to stand before the cheering crowds who 
secretly loathe me, to look down into the faces of the 
families whose children I have killed... 

The sun persists in rising, so I make myself stand. All 
my joints complain and my left leg has been asleep for 
so long that it takes several minutes of pacing to 
bring the feeling back into it. I've been in the woods 
three hours, but as I've made no real attempt at 
hunting, I have nothing to show for it. It doesn't 
matter for my mother and little sister, Prim, anymore. 
They can afford to buy butcher meat in town, 
although none of us likes it any better than fresh 
game. But my best friend, Gale Hawthorne, and his 
family will be depending on today's haul and I can't 
let them down. I start the hour-and-a-half trek it will 
take to cover our snare line. Back when we were in 
school, we had time in the afternoons to check the 
line and hunt and gather and still get back to trade in 
town. But now that Gale has gone to work in the coal 
mines — and I have nothing to do all day — I've taken 
over the job. 

By this time Gale will have clocked in at the mines, 
taken the stomach-churning elevator ride into the 
depths of the earth, and be pounding away at a coal 
seam. I know what it's like down there. Every year in 
school, as part of our training, my class had to tour 
the mines. When I was little, it was just unpleasant. 
The claustrophobic tunnels, foul air, suffocating 
darkness on all sides. But after my father and several 
other miners were killed in an explosion, I could 
barely force myself onto the elevator. The annual trip 
became an enormous source of anxiety. Twice I made 
myself so sick in anticipation of it that my mother 
kept me home because she thought I had contracted 
the flu. 



4 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I think of Gale, who is only really alive in the woods, 
with its fresh air and sunlight and clean, flowing 
water. I don't know how he stands it. Well... yes, I do. 
He stands it because it's the way to feed his mother 
and two younger brothers and sister. And here I am 
with buckets of money, far more than enough to feed 
both our families now, and he won't take a single 
coin. It's even hard for him to let me bring in meat, 
although he'd surely have kept my mother and Prim 
supplied if I'd been killed in the Games. I tell him he's 
doing me a favor, that it drives me nuts to sit around 
all day. Even so, I never drop off the game while he's 
at home. Which is easy since he works twelve hours a 
day. 

The only time I really get to see Gale now is on 
Sundays, when we meet up in the woods to hunt 
together. It's still the best day of the week, but it's not 
like it used to be before, when we could tell each 
other anything. The Games have spoiled even that. I 
keep hoping that as time passes we'll regain the ease 
between us, but part of me knows it's futile. There's 
no going back. 

I get a good haul from the traps — eight rabbits, two 
squirrels, and a beaver that swam into a wire 
contraption Gale designed himself. He's something of 
a whiz with snares, rigging them to bent saplings so 
they pull the kill out of the reach of predators, 
balancing logs on delicate stick triggers, weaving 
inescapable baskets to capture fish. As I go along, 
carefully resetting each snare, I know I can never 
quite replicate his eye for balance, his instinct for 
where the prey will cross the path. It's more than 
experience. It's a natural gift. Like the way I can shoot 
at an animal in almost complete darkness and still 
take it down with one arrow. 



5 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



By the time I make it back to the fence that 
surrounds District 12, the sun is well up. As always, I 
listen a moment, but there's no telltale hum of 
electrical current running through the chain link. 
There hardly ever is, even though the thing is 
supposed to be charged full-time. I wriggle through 
the opening at the bottom of the fence and come up in 
the Meadow, just a stone's throw from my home. My 
old home. We still get to keep it since officially it's the 
designated dwelling of my mother and sister. If I 
should drop dead right now, they would have to 
return to it. But at present, they're both happily 
installed in the new house in the Victor's Village, and 
I'm the only one who uses the squat little place where 
I was raised. To me, it's my real home. 

I go there now to switch my clothes. Exchange my 
father's old leather jacket for a fine wool coat that 
always seems too tight in the shoulders. Leave my 
soft, worn hunting boots for a pair of expensive 
machine-made shoes that my mother thinks are more 
appropriate for someone of my status. I've already 
stowed my bow and arrows in a hollow log in the 
woods. Although time is ticking away, I allow myself a 
few minutes to sit in the kitchen. It has an 
abandoned quality with no fire on the hearth, no cloth 
on the table. I mourn my old life here. We barely 
scraped by, but I knew where I fit in, I knew what my 
place was in the tightly interwoven fabric that was 
our life. I wish I could go back to it because, in 
retrospect, it seems so secure compared with now, 
when I am so rich and so famous and so hated by the 
authorities in the Capitol. 

A wailing at the back door demands my attention. I 
open it to find Buttercup, Prim's scruffy old tomcat. 
He dislikes the new house almost as much as I do 
and always leaves it when my sister's at school. We've 
never been particularly fond of each other, but now 
6 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



we have this new bond. I let him in, feed him a chunk 
of beaver fat, and even rub him between the ears for a 
bit. "You're hideous, you know that, right?" I ask him. 
Buttercup nudges my hand for more petting, but we 
have to go. "Come on, you." I scoop him up with one 
hand, grab my game bag with the other, and haul 
them both out onto the street. The cat springs free 
and disappears under a bush. 

The shoes pinch my toes as I crunch along the cinder 
street. Cutting down alleys and through backyards 
gets me to Gale's house in minutes. His mother, 
Hazelle, sees me through the window, where she's 
bent over the kitchen sink. She dries her hands on 
her apron and disappears to meet me at the door. 

I like Hazelle. Respect her. The explosion that killed 
my father took out her husband as well, leaving her 
with three boys and a baby due any day. Less than a 
week after she gave birth, she was out hunting the 
streets for work. The mines weren't an option, what 
with a baby to look after, but she managed to get 
laundry from some of the merchants in town. At 
fourteen, Gale, the eldest of the kids, became the 
main supporter of the family. He was already signed 
up for tesserae, which entitled them to a meager 
supply of grain and oil in exchange for his entering 
his name extra times in the drawing to become a 
tribute. On top of that, even back then, he was a 
skilled trapper. But it wasn't enough to keep a family 
of five without Hazelle working her fingers to the bone 
on that washboard. In winter her hands got so red 
and cracked, they bled at the slightest provocation. 
Still would if it wasn't for a salve my mother 
concocted. But they are determined, Hazelle and 
Gale, that the other boys, twelve-year-old Rory and 
ten-year-old Vick, and the baby, four-year-old Posy, 
will never have to sign up for tesserae. 



7 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Hazelle smiles when she sees the game. She takes the 
beaver by the tail, feeling its weight. "He's going to 
make a nice stew." Unlike Gale, she has no problem 
with our hunting arrangement. 

"Good pelt, too," I answer. It's comforting here with 
Hazelle. Weighing the merits of the game, just as we 
always have. She pours me a mug of herb tea, which I 
wrap my chilled fingers around gratefully. "You know, 
when I get back from the tour, I was thinking I might 
take Rory out with me sometimes. After school. Teach 
him to shoot." 

Hazelle nods. "That'd be good. Gale means to, but he's 
only got his Sundays, and I think he likes saving 
those for you." 

I can't stop the redness that floods my cheeks. It's 
stupid, of course. Hardly anybody knows me better 
than Hazelle. Knows the bond I share with Gale. I'm 
sure plenty of people assumed that we'd eventually 
get married even if I never gave it any thought. But 
that was before the Games. Before my fellow tribute, 
Peeta Mellark, announced he was madly in love with 
me. Our romance became a key strategy for our 
survival in the arena. Only it wasn't just a strategy for 
Peeta. I'm not sure what it was for me. But I know 
now it was nothing but painful for Gale. My chest 
tightens as I think about how, on the Victory Tour, 
Peeta and I will have to present ourselves as lovers 
again. 

I gulp my tea even though it's too hot and push back 
from the table. "I better get going. Make myself 
presentable for the cameras." 

Hazelle hugs me. "Enjoy the food." 

"Absolutely," I say. 

8 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



My next stop is the Hob, where I've traditionally done 
the bulk of my trading. Years ago it was a warehouse 
to store coal, but when it fell into disuse, it became a 
meeting place for illegal trades and then blossomed 
into a full-time black market. If it attracts a 
somewhat criminal element, then I belong here, I 
guess. Hunting in the woods surrounding District 12 
violates at least a dozen laws and is punishable by 
death. 

Although they never mention it, I owe the people who 
frequent the Hob. Gale told me that Greasy Sae, the 
old woman who serves up soup, started a collection to 
sponsor Peeta and me during the Games. It was 
supposed to be just a Hob thing, but a lot of other 
people heard about it and chipped in. I don't know 
exactly how much it was, and the price of any gift in 
the arena was exorbitant. But for all I know, it made 
the difference between my life and death. 

It's still odd to drag open the front door with an empty 
game bag, with nothing to trade, and instead feel the 
heavy pocket of coins against my hip. I try to hit as 
many stalls as possible, spreading out my purchases 
of coffee, buns, eggs, yarn, and oil. As an 
afterthought, I buy three bottles of white liquor from a 
one-armed woman named Ripper, a victim of a mine 
accident who was smart enough to find a way to stay 
alive. 

The liquor isn't for my family. It's for Haymitch, who 
acted as mentor for Peeta and me in the Games. He's 
surly, violent, and drunk most of the time. But he did 
his job — more than his job — because for the first time 
in history, two tributes were allowed to win. So no 
matter who Haymitch is, I owe him, too. And that's for 
always. I'm getting the white liquor because a few 
weeks ago he ran out and there was none for sale and 
he had a withdrawal, shaking and screaming at 
9 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



terrifying things only he could see. He scared Prim to 
death and, frankly, it wasn't much fun for me to see 
him like that, either. Ever since then I've been sort of 
stockpiling the stuff just in case there's a shortage 
again. 

Cray, our Head Peacekeeper, frowns when he sees me 
with the bottles. He's an older man with a few strands 
of silver hair combed sideways above his bright red 
face. "That stuffs too strong for you, girl." He should 
know. Next to Haymitch, Cray drinks more than 
anyone I've ever met. 

"Aw, my mother uses it in medicines," I say 
indifferently. 

"Well, it'd kill just about anything," he says, and slaps 
down a coin for a bottle. 

When I reach Greasy Sae's stall, I boost myself up to 
sit on the counter and order some soup, which looks 
to be some kind of gourd and bean mixture. A 
Peacekeeper named Darius comes up and buys a 
bowl while I'm eating. As law enforcers go, he's one of 
my favorites. Never really throwing his weight around, 
usually good for a joke. He's probably in his twenties, 
but he doesn't seem much older than I do. Something 
about his smile, his red hair that sticks out every 
which way, gives him a boyish quality. 

"Aren't you supposed to be on a train?" he asks me. 

"They're collecting me at noon," I answer. 

"Shouldn't you look better?" he asks in a loud 
whisper. I can't help smiling at his teasing, in spite of 
my mood. "Maybe a ribbon in your hair or 
something?" He flicks my braid with his hand and I 
brush him away. 

10 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Don't worry. By the time they get through with me 111 
be unrecognizable," I say. 

"Good," he says. "Let's show a little district pride for a 
change, Miss Everdeen. Hm?" He shakes his head at 
Greasy Sae in mock disapproval and walks off to join 
his friends. 

"I'll want that bowl back," Greasy Sae calls after him, 
but since she's laughing, she doesn't sound 
particularly stern. "Gale going to see you off?" she 
asks me. 

"No, he wasn't on the list," I say. "I saw him Sunday, 
though." 

"Think he'd have made the list. Him being your 
cousin and all," she says wryly. 

It's just one more part of the lie the Capitol has 
concocted. When Peeta and I made it into the final 
eight in the Hunger Games, they sent reporters to do 
personal stories about us. When they asked about my 
friends, everyone directed them to Gale. But it 
wouldn't do, what with the romance I was playing out 
in the arena, to have my best friend be Gale. He was 
too handsome, too male, and not the least bit willing 
to smile and play nice for the cameras. We do 
resemble each other, though, quite a bit. We have 
that Seam look. Dark straight hair, olive skin, gray 
eyes. So some genius made him my cousin. I didn't 
know about it until we were already home, on the 
platform at the train station, and my mother said, 
"Your cousins can hardly wait to see you!" Then I 
turned and saw Gale and Hazelle and all the kids 
waiting for me, so what could I do but go along? 



11 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Greasy Sae knows we're not related, but even some of 
the people who have known us for years seem to have 
forgotten. 

"I just can't wait for the whole thing to be over," I 
whisper. 

"I know," says Greasy Sae. "But you've got to go 
through it to get to the end of it. Better not be late." 

A light snow starts to fall as I make my way to the 
Victor's Village. It's about a half-mile walk from the 
square in the center of town, but it seems like 
another world entirely. 

It's a separate community built around a beautiful 
green, dotted with flowering bushes. There are twelve 
houses, each large enough to hold ten of the one I 
was raised in. Nine stand empty, as they always have. 
The three in use belong to Haymitch, Peeta, and me. 

The houses inhabited by my family and Peeta give off 
a warm glow of life. Lit windows, smoke from the 
chimneys, bunches of brightly colored corn affixed to 
the front doors as decoration for the upcoming 
Harvest Festival. However, Haymitch 's house, despite 
the care taken by the grounds-keeper, exudes an air 
of abandonment and neglect. I brace myself at his 
front door, knowing it will be foul, then push inside. 

My nose immediately wrinkles in disgust. Haymitch 
refuses to let anyone in to clean and does a poor job 
himself. Over the years the odors of liquor and vomit, 
boiled cabbage and burned meat, unwashed clothes 
and mouse droppings have intermingled into a stench 
that brings tears to my eyes. I wade through a litter of 
discarded wrappings, broken glass, and bones to 
where I know I will find Haymitch. He sits at the 



12 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



kitchen table, his arms sprawled across the wood, his 
face in a puddle of liquor, snoring his head off. 



I nudge his shoulder. "Get up!" I say loudly, because 
I've learned there's no subtle way to wake him. His 
snoring stops for a moment, questioningly, and then 
resumes. I push him harder. "Get up, Haymitch. It's 
tour day!" I force the window up, inhaling deep 
breaths of the clean air outside. My feet shift through 
the garbage on the floor, and I unearth a tin coffeepot 
and fill it at the sink. The stove isn't completely out 
and I manage to coax the few live coals into a flame. I 
pour some ground coffee into the pot, enough to make 
sure the resulting brew will be good and strong, and 
set it on the stove to boil. 

Haymitch is still dead to the world. Since nothing else 
has worked, I fill a basin with icy cold water, dump it 
on his head, and spring out of the way. A guttural 
animal sound comes from his throat. He jumps up, 
kicking his chair ten feet behind him and wielding a 
knife. I forgot he always sleeps with one clutched in 
his hand. I should have pried it from his fingers, but 
I've had a lot on my mind. Spewing profanity, he 
slashes the air a few moments before coming to his 
senses. He wipes his face on his shirtsleeve and turns 
to the windowsill where I perch, just in case I need to 
make a quick exit. 

"What are you doing?" he sputters. 

"You told me to wake you an hour before the cameras 
come," I say. 

"What?" he says. 

"Your idea," I insist. 

He seems to remember. "Why am I all wet?" 



13 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"I couldn't shake you awake," I say. "Look, if you 
wanted to be babied, you should have asked Peeta." 



"Asked me what?" Just the sound of his voice twists 
my stomach into a knot of unpleasant emotions like 
guilt, sadness, and fear. And longing. I might as well 
admit there's some of that, too. Only it has too much 
competition to ever win out. 

I watch as Peeta crosses to the table, the sunlight 
from the window picking up the glint of fresh snow in 
his blond hair. He looks strong and healthy, so 
different from the sick, starving boy I knew in the 
arena, and you can barely even notice his limp now. 
He sets a loaf of fresh-baked bread on the table and 
holds out his hand to Haymitch. 

"Asked you to wake me without giving me 
pneumonia," says Haymitch, passing over his knife. 
He pulls off his filthy shirt, revealing an equally soiled 
undershirt, and rubs himself down with the dry part. 

Peeta smiles and douses Haymitch 's knife in white 
liquor from a bottle on the floor. He wipes the blade 
clean on his shirttail and slices the bread. Peeta 
keeps all of us in fresh baked goods. I hunt. He 
bakes. Haymitch drinks. We have our own ways to 
stay busy, to keep thoughts of our time as 
contestants in the Hunger Games at bay. It's not until 
he's handed Haymitch the heel that he even looks at 
me for the first time. "Would you like a piece?" 

"No, I ate at the Hob," I say. "But thank you." My 
voice doesn't sound like my own, it's so formal. Just 
as it's been every time I've spoken to Peeta since the 
cameras finished filming our happy homecoming and 
we returned to our real lives. 

"You're welcome," he says back stiffly. 



14 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Haymitch tosses his shirt somewhere into the mess. 
"Brrr. You two have got a lot of warming up to do 
before showtime." 

He's right, of course. The audience will be expecting 
the pair of lovebirds who won the Hunger Games. Not 
two people who can barely look each other in the eye. 
But all I say is, "Take a bath, Haymitch." Then I swing 
out the window, drop to the ground, and head across 
the green to my house. 

The snow has begun to stick and I leave a trail of 
footprints behind me. At the front door, I pause to 
knock the wet stuff from my shoes before I go in. My 
mother's been working day and night to make 
everything perfect for the cameras, so it's no time to 
be tracking up her shiny floors. I've barely stepped 
inside when she's there, holding my arm as if to stop 
me. 

"Don't worry, I'm taking them off here," I say, leaving 
my shoes on the mat. 

My mother gives an odd, breathy laugh and removes 
the game bag loaded with supplies from my shoulder. 
"It's just snow. Did you have a nice walk?" 

"Walk?" She knows I've been in the woods half the 
night. Then I see the man standing behind her in the 
kitchen doorway. One look at his tailored suit and 
surgically perfected features and I know he's from the 
Capitol. Something is wrong. "It was more like 
skating. It's really getting slippery out there." 

"Someone's here to see you," says my mother. Her 
face is too pale and I can hear the anxiety she's trying 
to hide. 



15 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"I thought they weren't due until noon." I pretend not 
to notice her state. "Did Cinna come early to help me 
get ready?" 

"No, Katniss, it's — " my mother begins. 

"This way, please, Miss Everdeen," says the man. He 
gestures down the hallway. It's weird to be ushered 
around your own home, but I know better than to 
comment on it. 

As I go, I give my mother a reassuring smile over my 
shoulder. "Probably more instructions for the tour." 
They've been sending me all kinds of stuff about my 
itinerary and what protocol will be observed in each 
district. But as I walk toward the door of the study, a 
door I have never even seen closed until this moment, 
I can feel my mind begin to race. Who is here? What 
do they want? Why is my mother so pale? 

"Go right in," says the Capitol man, who has followed 
me down the hallway. 

I twist the polished brass knob and step inside. My 
nose registers the conflicting scents of roses and 
blood. A small, white-haired man who seems vaguely 
familiar is reading a book. He holds up a finger as if 
to say, "Give me a moment." Then he turns and my 
heart skips a beat. 

I'm staring into the snakelike eyes of President Snow. 



16 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



In my mind, President Snow should be viewed in front 
of marble pillars hung with oversized flags. It's jarring 
to see him surrounded by the ordinary objects in the 
room. Like taking the lid off a pot and finding a 
fanged viper instead of stew. 

What could he be doing here? My mind rushes back 
to the opening days of other Victory Tours. I 
remember seeing the winning tributes with their 
mentors and stylists. Even some high government 
officials have made appearances occasionally. But I 
have never seen President Snow. He attends 
celebrations in the Capitol. Period. 

If he's made the journey all the way from his city, it 
can only mean one thing. I'm in serious trouble. And 
if I am, so is my family. A shiver goes through me 
when I think of the proximity of my mother and sister 
to this man who despises me. Will always despise me. 
Because I outsmarted his sadistic Hunger Games, 
made the Capitol look foolish, and consequently 
undermined his control. 

All I was doing was trying to keep Peeta and myself 
alive. Any act of rebellion was purely coincidental. 
But when the Capitol decrees that only one tribute 
can live and you have the audacity to challenge it, I 
guess that's a rebellion in itself. My only defense was 
pretending that I was driven insane by a passionate 
love for Peeta. So we were both allowed to live. To be 
crowned victors. To go home and celebrate and wave 
good-bye to the cameras and be left alone. Until now. 

Perhaps it is the newness of the house or the shock of 

seeing him or the mutual understanding that he 

17 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



could have me killed in a second that makes me feel 
like the intruder. As if this is his home and I'm the 
uninvited party. So I don't welcome him or offer him a 
chair. I don't say anything. In fact, I treat him as if 
he's a real snake, the venomous kind. I stand 
motionless, my eyes locked on him, considering plans 
of retreat. 

"I think well make this whole situation a lot simpler 
by agreeing not to lie to each other," he says. "What 
do you think?" 

I think my tongue has frozen and speech will be 
impossible, so I surprise myself by answering back in 
a steady voice, "Yes, I think that would save time." 

President Snow smiles and I notice his lips for the 
first time. I'm expecting snake lips, which is to say 
none. But his are overly full, the skin stretched too 
tight. I have to wonder if his mouth has been altered 
to make him more appealing. If so, it was a waste of 
time and money, because he's not appealing at all. 
"My advisors were concerned you would be difficult, 
but you're not planning on being difficult, are you?" 
he asks. 

"No," I answer. 

"That's what I told them. I said any girl who goes to 
such lengths to preserve her life isn't going to be 
interested in throwing it away with both hands. And 
then there's her family to think of. Her mother, her 
sister, and all those... cousins." By the way he lingers 
on the word "cousins," I can tell he knows that Gale 
and I don't share a family tree. 

Well, it's all on the table now. Maybe that's better. I 
don't do well with ambiguous threats. I'd much rather 
know the score. 



18 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Let's sit." President Snow takes a seat at the large 
desk of polished wood where Prim does her homework 
and my mother her budgets. Like our home, this is a 
place that he has no right, but ultimately every right, 
to occupy. I sit in front of the desk on one of the 
carved, straight-backed chairs. It's made for someone 
taller than I am, so only my toes rest on the ground. 

"I have a problem, Miss Everdeen," says President 
Snow. "A problem that began the moment you pulled 
out those poisonous berries in the arena." 

That was the moment when I guessed that if the 
Gamemakers had to choose between watching Peeta 
and me commit suicide — which would mean having 
no victor — and letting us both live, they would take 
the latter. 

"If the Head Gamemaker, Seneca Crane, had had any 
brains, he'd have blown you to dust right then. But 
he had an unfortunate sentimental streak. So here 
you are. Can you guess where he is?" he asks. 

I nod because, by the way he says it, it's clear that 
Seneca Crane has been executed. The smell of roses 
and blood has grown stronger now that only a desk 
separates us. There's a rose in President Snow's lapel, 
which at least suggests a source of the flower 
perfume, but it must be genetically enhanced, 
because no real rose reeks like that. As for the 
blood... I don't know. 

"After that, there was nothing to do but let you play 
out your little scenario. And you were pretty good, 
too, with the love-crazed schoolgirl bit. The people in 
the Capitol were quite convinced. Unfortunately, not 
everyone in the districts fell for your act," he says. 



19 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



My face must register at least a flicker of 
bewilderment, because he addresses it. 

"This, of course, you don't know. You have no access 
to information about the mood in other districts. In 
several of them, however, people viewed your little 
trick with the berries as an act of defiance, not an act 
of love. And if a girl from District Twelve of all places 
can defy the Capitol and walk away unharmed, what 
is to stop them from doing the same?" he says. "What 
is to prevent, say, an uprising?" 

It takes a moment for his last sentence to sink in. 
Then the full weight of it hits me. "There have been 
uprisings?" I ask, both chilled and somewhat elated 
by the possibility. 

"Not yet. But they'll follow if the course of things 
doesn't change. And uprisings have been known to 
lead to revolution." President Snow rubs a spot over 
his left eyebrow, the very spot where I myself get 
headaches. "Do you have any idea what that would 
mean? How many people would die? What conditions 
those left would have to face? Whatever problems 
anyone may have with the Capitol, believe me when I 
say that if it released its grip on the districts for even 
a short time, the entire system would collapse." 

I'm taken aback by the directness and even the 
sincerity of this speech. As if his primary concern is 
the welfare of the citizens of Panem, when nothing 
could be further from the truth. I don't know how I 
dare to say the next words, but I do. "It must be very 
fragile, if a handful of berries can bring it down." 

There's a long pause while he examines me. Then he 
simply says, "It is fragile, but not in the way that you 
suppose." 



20 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



There's a knock at the door, and the Capitol man 
sticks his head in. "Her mother wants to know if you 
want tea." 

"I would. I would like tea," says the president. The 
door opens wider, and there stands my mother, 
holding a tray with a china tea set she brought to the 
Seam when she married. "Set it here, please." He 
places his book on the corner of the desk and pats 
the center. 

My mother sets the tray on the desk. It holds a china 
teapot and cups, cream and sugar, and a plate of 
cookies. They are beautifully iced with softly colored 
flowers. The frosting work can only be Peeta's. 

"What a welcome sight. You know, it's funny how 
often people forget that presidents need to eat, too," 
President Snow says charmingly. Well, it seems to 
relax my mother a bit, anyway. 

"Can I get you anything else? I can cook something 
more substantial if you're hungry," she offers. 

"No, this could not be more perfect. Thank you," he 
says, clearly dismissing her. My mother nods, shoots 
me a glance, and goes. President Snow pours tea for 
both of us and fills his with cream and sugar, then 
takes a long time stirring. I sense he has had his say 
and is waiting for me to respond. 

"I didn't mean to start any uprisings," I tell him. 

"I believe you. It doesn't matter. Your stylist turned 
out to be prophetic in his wardrobe choice. Katniss 
Everdeen, the girl who was on fire, you have provided 
a spark that, left unattended, may grow to an inferno 
that destroys Panem," he says. 



21 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Why don't you just kill me now?" I blurt out. 
"Publicly?" he asks. "That would only add fuel to the 
flames." 

"Arrange an accident, then," I say. 

"Who would buy it?" he asks. "Not you, if you were 
watching." 

"Then just tell me what you want me to do. Ill do it," I 
say. 

"If only it were that simple." He picks up one of the 
flowered cookies and examines it. "Lovely. Your 
mother made these?" 

"Peeta." And for the first time, I find I can't hold his 
gaze. I reach for my tea but set it back down when I 
hear the cup rattling against the saucer. To cover I 
quickly take a cookie. 

"Peeta. How is the love of your life?" he asks. "Good," I 
say. 

"At what point did he realize the exact degree of your 
indifference?" he asks, dipping his cookie in his tea. 
"I'm not indifferent," I say. 

"But perhaps not as taken with the young man as you 
would have the country believe," he says. "Who says 
I'm not?" I say. 

"I do," says the president. "And I wouldn't be here if I 
were the only person who had doubts. How's the 
handsome cousin?" 

"I don't know... I don't..." My revulsion at this 
conversation, at discussing my feelings for two of the 



22 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



people I care most about with President Snow, chokes 
me off. 



"Speak, Miss Everdeen. Him I can easily kill off if we 
don't come to a happy resolution," he says. "You 
aren't doing him a favor by disappearing into the 
woods with him each Sunday." 

If he knows this, what else does he know? And how 
does he know it? Many people could tell him that Gale 
and I spend our Sundays hunting. Don't we show up 
at the end of each one loaded down with game? 
Haven't we for years? The real question is what he 
thinks goes on in the woods beyond District 12. 
Surely they haven't been tracking us in there. Or have 
they? Could we have been followed? That seems 
impossible. At least by a person. Cameras? That 
never crossed my mind until this moment. The woods 
have always been our place of safety, our place 
beyond the reach of the Capitol, where we're free to 
say what we feel, be who we are. At least before the 
Games. If we've been watched since, what have they 
seen? Two people hunting, saying treasonous things 
against the Capitol, yes. But not two people in love, 
which seems to be President Snow's implication. We 
are safe on that charge. Unless... unless... 

It only happened once. It was fast and unexpected, 
but it did happen. 

After Peeta and I got home from the Games, it was 
several weeks before I saw Gale alone. First there 
were the obligatory celebrations. A banquet for the 
victors that only the most high-ranking people were 
invited to. A holiday for the whole district with free 
food and entertainers brought in from the Capitol. 
Parcel Day, the first of twelve, in which food packages 
were delivered to every person in the district. That 
was my favorite. To see all those hungry kids in the 



23 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Seam running around, waving cans of applesauce, 
tins of meat, even candy. Back home, too big to carry, 
would be bags of grain, cans of oil. To know that once 
a month for a year they would all receive another 
parcel. That was one of the few times I actually felt 
good about winning the Games. 

So between the ceremonies and events and the 
reporters documenting my every move as I presided 
and thanked and kissed Peeta for the audience, I had 
no privacy at all. After a few weeks, things finally died 
down. The camera crews and reporters packed up 
and went home. Peeta and I assumed the cool 
relationship we've had ever since. My family settled 
into our house in the Victor's Village. The everyday 
life of District 12 — workers to the mines, kids to 
school — resumed its usual pace. I waited until I 
thought the coast was really clear, and then one 
Sunday, without telling anyone, I got up hours before 
dawn and took off for the woods. 

The weather was still warm enough that I didn't need 
a jacket. I packed along a bag filled with special foods, 
cold chicken and cheese and bakery bread and 
oranges. Down at my old house, I put on my hunting 
boots. As usual, the fence was not charged and it was 
simple to slip into the woods and retrieve my bow and 
arrows. I went to our place, Gale's and mine, where 
we had shared breakfast the morning of the reaping 
that sent me into the Games. 

I waited at least two hours. I'd begun to think that 
he'd given up on me in the weeks that had passed. Or 
that he no longer cared about me. Hated me even. 
And the idea of losing him forever, my best friend, the 
only person I'd ever trusted with my secrets, was so 
painful I couldn't stand it. Not on top of everything 
else that had happened. I could feel my eyes tearing 



24 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



up and my throat starting to close the way it does 
when I get upset. 



Then I looked up and there he was, ten feet away, just 
watching me. Without even thinking, I jumped up and 
threw my arms around him, making some weird 
sound that combined laughing, choking, and crying. 
He was holding me so tightly that I couldn't see his 
face, but it was a really long time before he let me go 
and then he didn't have much choice, because I'd 
gotten this unbelievably loud case of the hiccups and 
had to get a drink. 

We did what we always did that day. Ate breakfast. 
Hunted and fished and gathered. Talked about people 
in town. But not about us, his new life in the mines, 
my time in the arena. Just about other things. By the 
time we were at the hole in the fence that's nearest 
the Hob, I think I really believed that things could be 
the same. That we could go on as we always had. I'd 
given all the game to Gale to trade since we had so 
much food now. I told him I'd skip the Hob, even 
though I was looking forward to going there, because 
my mother and sister didn't even know I'd gone 
hunting and they'd be wondering where I was. Then 
suddenly, as I was suggesting I take over the daily 
snare run, he took my face in his hands and kissed 
me. 

I was completely unprepared. You would think that 
after all the hours I'd spent with Gale — watching him 
talk and laugh and frown — that I would know all 
there was to know about his lips. But I hadn't 
imagined how warm they would feel pressed against 
my own. Or how those hands, which could set the 
most intricate of snares, could as easily entrap me. I 
think I made some sort of noise in the back of my 
throat, and I vaguely remember my fingers, curled 
tightly closed, resting on his chest. Then he let go and 



25 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



said, "I had to do that. At least once." And he was 
gone. 



Despite the fact that the sun was setting and my 
family would be worried, I sat by a tree next to the 
fence. I tried to decide how I felt about the kiss, if I 
had liked it or resented it, but all I really remembered 
was the pressure of Gale's lips and the scent of the 
oranges that still lingered on his skin. It was pointless 
comparing it with the many kisses I'd exchanged with 
Peeta. I still hadn't figured out if any of those 
counted. Finally I went home. 

That week I managed the snares and dropped off the 
meat with Hazelle. But I didn't see Gale until Sunday. 
I had this whole speech worked out, about how I 
didn't want a boyfriend and never planned on 
marrying, but I didn't end up using it. Gale acted as if 
the kiss had never happened. 

Maybe he was waiting for me to say something. Or 
kiss him back. Instead I just pretended it had never 
happened, either. But it had. Gale had shattered 
some invisible barrier between us and, with it, any 
hope I had of resuming our old, uncomplicated 
friendship. Whatever I pretended, I could never look 
at his lips in quite the same way. 

This all flashes through my head in an instant as 
President Snow's eyes bore into me on the heels of his 
threat to kill Gale. How stupid I've been to think the 
Capitol would just ignore me once I'd returned home! 
Maybe I didn't know about the potential uprisings. 
But I knew they were angry with me. Instead of acting 
with the extreme caution the situation called for, 
what have I done? From the president's point of view, 
I've ignored Peeta and flaunted my preference for 
Gale's company before the whole district. And by 
doing so made it clear I was, in fact, mocking the 



26 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Capitol. Now I've endangered Gale and his family and 
my family and Peeta, too, by my carelessness. 

"Please don't hurt Gale," I whisper. "He's just my 
friend. He's been my friend for years. That's all that's 
between us. Besides, everyone thinks we're cousins 
now." 

"I'm only interested in how it affects your dynamic 
with Peeta, thereby affecting the mood in the 
districts," he says. 

"It will be the same on the tour. Ill be in love with him 
just as I was," I say. 

"Just as you are," corrects President Snow. 
"Just as I am," I confirm. 

"Only youll have to do even better if the uprisings are 
to be averted," he says. "This tour will be your only 
chance to turn things around." 

"I know. I will. Ill convince everyone in the districts 
that I wasn't defying the Capitol, that I was crazy with 
love," I say. 

President Snow rises and dabs his puffy lips with a 
napkin. "Aim higher in case you fall short." 

"What do you mean? How can I aim higher?" I ask. 

"Convince me" he says. He drops the napkin and 
retrieves his book. I don't watch him as he heads for 
the door, so I flinch when he whispers in my ear. "By 
the way, I know about the kiss." Then the door clicks 
shut behind him. 



27 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



The smell of blood... it was on his breath. 

What does he do? I think. Drink it? I imagine him 
sipping it from a teacup. Dipping a cookie into the 
stuff and pulling it out dripping red. 

Outside the window, a car comes to life, soft and 
quiet like the purr of a cat, then fades away into the 
distance. It slips off as it arrived, unnoticed. 

The room seems to be spinning in slow, lopsided 
circles, and I wonder if I might black out. I lean 
forward and clutch the desk with one hand. The other 
still holds Peeta's beautiful cookie. I think it had a 
tiger lily on it, but now it's been reduced to crumbs in 
my fist. I didn't even know I was crushing it, but I 
guess I had to hold on to something while my world 
veered out of control. 

A visit from President Snow. Districts on the verge of 
uprisings. A direct death threat to Gale, with others to 
follow. Everyone I love doomed. And who knows who 
else will pay for my actions? Unless I turn things 
around on this tour. Quiet the discontent and put the 
president's mind at rest. And how? By proving to the 
country beyond any shadow of a doubt that I love 
Peeta Mellark. 

/ can't do it, I think. I'm not that good. Peeta's the good 
one, the likable one. He can make people believe 
anything. I'm the one who shuts up and sits back and 
lets him do as much of the talking as possible. But it 
isn't Peeta who has to prove his devotion. It's me. 



28 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I hear my mother's light, quick tread in the hall. She 
can't know, I think. Not about any of this. I reach my 
hands over the tray and quickly brush the bits of 
cookie from my palm and fingers. I take a shaky sip of 
my tea. 

"Is everything all right, Katniss?" she asks. 

"It's fine. We never see it on television, but the 
president always visits the victors before the tour to 
wish them luck," I say brightly. 

My mother's face floods with relief. "Oh. I thought 
there was some kind of trouble." 

"No, not at all," I say. "The trouble will start when my 
prep team sees how I've let my eyebrows grow back 
in." My mother laughs, and I think about how there 
was no going back after I took over caring for the 
family when I was eleven. How I will always have to 
protect her. 

"Why don't I start your bath?" she asks. 

"Great," I say, and I can see how pleased she is by my 
response. 

Since I've been home I've been trying hard to mend 
my relationship with my mother. Asking her to do 
things for me instead of brushing aside any offer of 
help, as I did for years out of anger. Letting her 
handle all the money I won. Returning her hugs 
instead of tolerating them. My time in the arena made 
me realize how I needed to stop punishing her for 
something she couldn't help, specifically the crushing 
depression she fell into after my father's death. 
Because sometimes things happen to people and 
they're not equipped to deal with them. 



29 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Like me, for instance. Right now. 



Besides, there's one wonderful thing she did when I 
arrived back in the district. After our families and 
friends had greeted Peeta and me at the train station, 
there were a few questions allowed from reporters. 
Someone asked my mother what she thought of my 
new boyfriend, and she replied that, while Peeta was 
the very model of what a young man should be, I 
wasn't old enough to have any boyfriend at all. She 
followed this with a pointed look at Peeta. There was a 
lot of laughter and comments like "Somebody's in 
trouble" from the press, and Peeta dropped my hand 
and sidestepped away from me. That didn't last 
long — there was too much pressure to act otherwise — 
but it gave us an excuse to be a little more reserved 
than we'd been in the Capitol. And maybe it can help 
account for how little I've been seen in Peeta's 
company since the cameras left. 

I go upstairs to the bathroom, where a steaming tub 
awaits. My mother has added a small bag of dried 
flowers that perfumes the air. None of us are used to 
the luxury of turning on a tap and having a limitless 
supply of hot water at our fingertips. We had only 
cold at our home in the Seam, and a bath meant 
boiling the rest over the fire. I undress and lower 
myself into the silky water — my mother has poured in 
some kind of oil as well — and try to get a grip on 
things. 

The first question is who to tell, if anyone. Not my 
mother or Prim, obviously; they'd only become sick 
with worry. Not Gale. Even if I could get word to him. 
What would he do with the information, anyway? If he 
were alone, I might try to persuade him to run away. 
Certainly he could survive in the woods. But he's not 
alone and he'd never leave his family. Or me. When I 
get home 111 have to tell him something about why 



30 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



our Sundays are a thing of the past, but I can't think 
about that now. Only about my next move. Besides, 
Gale's already so angry and frustrated with the 
Capitol that I sometimes think he's going to arrange 
his own uprising. The last thing he needs is an 
incentive. No, I can't tell anyone I'm leaving behind in 
District 12. 

There are still three people I might confide in, starting 
with Cinna, my stylist. But my guess is Cinna might 
already be at risk, and I don't want to pull him into 
any more trouble by closer association with me. Then 
there's Peeta, who will be my partner in this 
deception, but how do I begin that conversation? Hey, 
Peeta, remember how I told you I was kind of faking 
being in love with you? Well, I really need you to forget 
about that now and act extra in love with me or the 
president might kill Gale. I can't do it. Besides, Peeta 
will perform well whether he knows what's at stake or 
not. That leaves Haymitch. Drunken, cranky, 
confrontational Haymitch, who I just poured a basin 
of ice water on. As my mentor in the Games it was his 
duty to keep me alive. I only hope he's still up for the 
job. 

I slide down into the water, letting it block out the 
sounds around me. I wish the tub would expand so I 
could go swimming, like I used to on hot summer 
Sundays in the woods with my father. Those days 
were a special treat. We would leave early in the 
morning and hike farther into the woods than usual 
to a small lake he'd found while hunting. I don't even 
remember learning to swim, I was so young when he 
taught me. I just remember diving, turning 
somersaults, and paddling around. The muddy 
bottom of the lake beneath my toes. The smell of 
blossoms and greenery. Floating on my back, as I am 
now, staring at the blue sky while the chatter of the 
woods was muted by the water. He'd bag the 
31 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



waterfowl that nested around the shore, I'd hunt for 
eggs in the grasses, and we'd both dig for katniss 
roots, the plant for which he named me, in the 
shallows. At night, when we got home, my mother 
would pretend not to recognize me because I was so 
clean. Then she'd cook up an amazing dinner of 
roasted duck and baked katniss tubers with gravy. 

I never took Gale to the lake. I could have. It's time- 
consuming to get there, but the waterfowl are such 
easy pickings you can make up for lost hunting time. 
It's a place I've never really wanted to share with 
anyone, though, a place that belonged only to my 
father and me. Since the Games, when I've had little 
to occupy my days, I've gone there a couple of times. 
The swimming was still nice, but mostly the visits 
depressed me. Over the course of the last five years, 
the lake's remarkably unchanged and I'm almost 
unrecognizable. 

Even underwater I can hear the sounds of 
commotion. Honking car horns, shouts of greeting, 
doors banging shut. It can only mean my entourage 
has arrived. I just have time to towel off and slip into 
a robe before my prep team bursts into the bathroom. 
There's no question of privacy. When it comes to my 
body, we have no secrets, these three people and me. 

"Katniss, your eyebrows!" Venia shrieks right off, and 
even with the black cloud hanging over me, I have to 
stifle a laugh. Her aqua hair has been styled so it 
sticks out in sharp points all over her head, and the 
gold tattoos that used to be confined above her brows 
have curled around under her eyes, all contributing 
to the impression that I've literally shocked her. 

Octavia comes up and pats Venia's back soothingly, 
her curvy body looking plumper than usual next to 
Venia's thin, angular one. "There, there. You can fix 
32 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



those in no time. But what am I going to do with 
these nails?" She grabs my hand and pins it flat 
between her two pea green ones. No, her skin isn't 
exactly pea green now. It's more of a light evergreen. 
The shift in shade is no doubt an attempt to stay 
abreast of the capricious fashion trends of the 
Capitol. "Really, Katniss, you could have left me 
something to work with!" she wails. 

It's true. I've bitten my nails to stubs in the past 
couple of months. I thought about trying to break the 
habit but couldn't think of a good reason I should. 
"Sorry," I mutter. I hadn't really been spending much 
time worrying about how it might affect my prep 
team. 

Flavius lifts a few strands of my wet, tangled hair. He 
gives his head a disapproving shake, causing his 
orange corkscrew curls to bounce around. "Has 
anyone touched this since you last saw us?" he asks 
sternly. "Remember, we specifically asked you to leave 
your hair alone." 

"Yes!" I say, grateful that I can show I haven't totally 
taken them for granted. "I mean, no, no one's cut it. I 
did remember that." No, I didn't. It's more like the 
issue never came up. Since I've been home, all I've 
done is stick it in its usual old braid down my back. 

This seems to mollify them, and they all kiss me, set 
me on a chair in my bedroom, and, as usual, start 
talking nonstop without bothering to notice if I'm 
listening. While Venia reinvents my eyebrows and 
Octavia gives me fake nails and Flavius massages goo 
into my hair, I hear all about the Capitol. What a hit 
the Games were, how dull things have been since, 
how no one can wait until Peeta and I visit again at 
the end of the Victory Tour. After that, it won't be long 



33 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



before the Capitol begins gearing up for the Quarter 
Quell. 

"Isn't it thrilling?" 
"Don't you feel so lucky?" 

"In your very first year of being a victor, you get to be 
a mentor in a Quarter Quell!" 

Their words overlap in a blur of excitement. 

"Oh, yes," I say neutrally. It's the best I can do. In a 
normal year, being a mentor to the tributes is the 
stuff of nightmares. I can't walk by the school now 
without wondering what kid 111 have to coach. But to 
make things even worse, this is the year of the 
Seventy-fifth Hunger Games, and that means it's also 
a Quarter Quell. They occur every twenty-five years, 
marking the anniversary of the districts' defeat with 
over-the-top celebrations and, for extra fun, some 
miserable twist for the tributes. I've never been alive 
for one, of course. But in school I remember hearing 
that for the second Quarter Quell, the Capitol 
demanded that twice the number of tributes be 
provided for the arena. The teachers didn't go into 
much more detail, which is surprising, because that 
was the year District 12's very own Haymitch 
Abernathy won the crown. 

"Haymitch better be preparing himself for a lot of 
attention!" squeals Octavia. 

Haymitch has never mentioned his personal 
experience in the arena to me. I would never ask. And 
if I ever saw his Games televised in reruns, I must've 
been too young to remember it. But the Capitol won't 
let him forget it this year. In a way, it's a good thing 
Peeta and I will both be available as mentors during 



34 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



the Quell, because it's a sure bet that Haymitch will 
be wasted. 

After they've exhausted the topic of the Quarter Quell, 
my prep team, launches into a whole lot of stuff about 
their incomprehensibly silly lives. Who said what 
about someone I've never heard of and what sort of 
shoes they just bought and a long story from Octavia 
about what a mistake it was to have everyone wear 
feathers to her birthday party. 

Soon my brows are stinging, my hair's smooth and 
silky, and my nails are ready to be painted. 
Apparently they've been given instruction to prepare 
only my hands and face, probably because everything 
else will be covered in the cold weather. Flavius badly 
wants to use his own trademark purple lipstick on me 
but resigns himself to a pink as they begin to color 
my face and nails. I can see by the palette Cinna has 
assigned that we're going for girlish, not sexy. 

Good. I'll never convince anyone of anything if I'm 
trying to be provocative. Haymitch made that very 
clear when he was coaching me for my interview for 
the Games. 

My mother comes in, somewhat shyly, and says that 
Cinna has asked her to show the preps how she did 
my hair the day of the reaping. They respond with 
enthusiasm and then watch, thoroughly engrossed, 
as she breaks down the process of the elaborate 
braided hairdo. In the mirror, I can see their earnest 
faces following her every move, their eagerness when 
it is their turn to try a step. In fact, all three are so 
readily respectful and nice to my mother that I feel 
bad about how I go around feeling so superior to 
them. Who knows who I would be or what I would 
talk about if I'd been raised in the Capitol? Maybe my 



35 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



biggest regret would be having feathered costumes at 
my birthday party, too. 



When my hair is done, I find Cinna downstairs in the 
living room, and just the sight of him makes me feel 
more hopeful. He looks the same as always, simple 
clothes, short brown hair, just a hint of gold eyeliner. 
We embrace, and I can barely keep from spilling out 
the entire episode with President Snow. But no, I've 
decided to tell Haymitch first. He'll know best who to 
burden with it. It's so easy to talk to Cinna, though. 
Lately we've been speaking a lot on the telephone that 
came with the house. It's sort of a joke, because 
almost no one else we know owns one. There's Peeta, 
but obviously I don't call him. Haymitch tore his out 
of the wall years ago. My friend Madge, the mayor's 
daughter, has a telephone in her house, but if we 
want to talk, we do it in person. At first, the thing 
barely ever got used. Then Cinna started to call to 
work on my talent. 

Every victor is supposed to have one. Your talent is 
the activity you take up since you don't have to work 
either in school or your district's industry. It can be 
anything, really, anything that they can interview you 
about. Peeta, it turns out, actually has a talent, which 
is painting. He's been frosting those cakes and 
cookies for years in his family's bakery. But now that 
he's rich, he can afford to smear real paint on 
canvases. I don't have a talent, unless you count 
hunting illegally, which they don't. Or maybe singing, 
which I wouldn't do for the Capitol in a million years. 
My mother tried to interest me in a variety of suitable 
alternatives from a list Effie Trinket sent her. 
Cooking, flower arranging, playing the flute. None of 
them took, although Prim had a knack for all three. 
Finally Cinna stepped in and offered to help me 
develop my passion for designing clothes, which really 
required development since it was nonexistent. But I 



36 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



said yes because it meant getting to talk to Cinna, 
and he promised he'd do all the work. 

Now he's arranging things around my living room: 
clothing, fabrics, and sketchbooks with designs he's 
drawn. I pick up one of the sketchbooks and examine 
a dress I supposedly created. "You know, I think I 
show a lot of promise," I say. 

"Get dressed, you worthless thing," he says, tossing a 
bundle of clothes at me. 

I may have no interest in designing clothes but I do 
love the ones Cinna makes for me. Like these. Flowing 
black pants made of a thick, warm material. A 
comfortable white shirt. A sweater woven from green 
and blue and gray strands of kitten- soft wool. Laced 
leather boots that don't pinch my toes. 

"Did I design my outfit?" I ask. 

"No, you aspire to design your outfit and be like me, 
your fashion hero," says Cinna. He hands me a small 
stack of cards. "You'll read these off camera while 
they're filming the clothes. Try to sound like you 
care." 

Just then, Effie Trinket arrives in a pumpkin orange 
wig to remind everyone, "We're on a schedule!" She 
kisses me on both cheeks while waving in the camera 
crew, then orders me into position. Effie's the only 
reason we got anywhere on time in the Capitol, so I 
try to accommodate her. I start bobbing around like a 
puppet, holding up outfits and saying meaningless 
things like "Don't you love it?" The sound team 
records me reading from my cards in a chirpy voice so 
they can insert it later, then I'm tossed out of the 
room so they can film my/Cinna's designs in peace. 



37 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Prim got out early from school for the event. Now she 
stands in the kitchen, being interviewed by another 
crew. She looks lovely in a sky blue frock that brings 
out her eyes, her blond hair pulled back in a 
matching ribbon. She's leaning a bit forward on the 
toes of her shiny white boots like she's about to take 
flight, like — 

Bam! It's like someone actually hits me in the chest. 
No one has, of course, but the pain is so real I take a 
step back. I squeeze my eyes shut and I don't see 
Prim — I see Rue, the twelve-year-old girl from District 
1 1 who was my ally in the arena. She could fly, 
birdlike, from tree to tree, catching on to the 
slenderest branches. Rue, who I didn't save. Who I let 
die. I picture her lying on the ground with the spear 
still wedged in her stomach... 

Who else will I fail to save from the Capitol's 
vengeance? Who else will be dead if I don't satisfy 
President Snow? 

I realize Cinna's trying to put a coat on me, so I raise 
my arms. I feel fur, inside and out, encasing me. It's 
from no animal I've ever seen. "Ermine," he tells me 
as I stroke the white sleeve. Leather gloves. A bright 
red scarf. Something furry covers my ears. "You're 
bringing earmuffs back in style." 

/ hate earmuffs, I think. They make it hard to hear, 
and since I was blasted deaf in one ear in the arena, I 
dislike them even more. After I won, the Capitol 
repaired my ear, but I still find myself testing it. 

My mother hurries up with something cupped in her 
hand. "For good luck," she says. 

It's the pin Madge gave me before I left for the Games. 
A mockingj ay flying in a circle of gold. I tried to give it 
38 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



to Rue but she wouldn't take it. She said the pin was 
the reason she'd decided to trust me. Cinna fixes it on 
the knot in the scarf. 



Effie Trinket's nearby, clapping her hands. "Attention, 
everyone! We're about to do the first outdoor shot, 
where the victors greet each other at the beginning of 
their marvelous trip. All right, Katniss, big smile, 
you're very excited, right?" I don't exaggerate when I 
say she shoves me out the door. 

For a moment I can't quite see right because of the 
snow, which is now coming down in earnest. Then I 
make out Peeta coming through his front door. In my 
head I hear President Snow's directive, "Convince me." 
And I know I must. 

My face breaks into a huge smile and I start walking 
in Peeta's direction. Then, as if I can't stand it 
another second, I start running. He catches me and 
spins me around and then he slips — he still isn't 
entirely in command of his artificial leg — and we fall 
into the snow, me on top of him, and that's where we 
have our first kiss in months. It's full of fur and 
snowflakes and lipstick, but underneath all that, I 
can feel the steadiness that Peeta brings to 
everything. And I know I'm not alone. As badly as I 
have hurt him, he won't expose me in front of the 
cameras. Won't condemn me with a halfhearted kiss. 
He's still looking out for me. Just as he did in the 
arena. Somehow the thought makes me want to cry. 
Instead I pull him to his feet, tuck my glove through 
the crook of his arm, and merrily pull him on our 
way. 

The rest of the day is a blur of getting to the station, 
bidding everyone good-bye, the train pulling out, the 
old team — Peeta and me, Effie and Haymitch, Cinna 
and Portia, Peeta's stylist — dining on an indescribably 



39 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



delicious meal I don't remember. And then I'm 
swathed in pajamas and a voluminous robe, sitting in 
my plush compartment, waiting for the others to go to 
sleep. I know Haymitch will be up for hours. He 
doesn't like to sleep when it's dark out. 

When the train seems quiet, I put on my slippers and 
pad down to his door. I have to knock several times 
before he answers, scowling, as if he's certain I've 
brought bad news. 

"What do you want?" he says, nearly knocking me out 
with a cloud of wine fumes. 

"I have to talk to you," I whisper. 

"Now?" he says. I nod. "This better be good." He waits, 
but I feel certain every word we utter on a Capitol 
train is being recorded. "Well?" he barks. 

The train starts to brake and for a second I think 
President Snow is watching me and doesn't approve 
of my confiding in Haymitch and has decided to go 
ahead and kill me now. But we're just stopping for 
fuel. 

"The train's so stuffy," I say. 

It's a harmless phrase, but I see Haymitch's eyes 
narrow in understanding. "I know what you need." He 
pushes past me and lurches down the hall to a door. 
When he wrestles it open, a blast of snow hits us. He 
trips out onto the ground. 

A Capitol attendant rushes to help, but Haymitch 
waves her away good-naturedly as he staggers off. 
"Just want some fresh air. Only be a minute." 



40 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Sorry. He's drunk," I say apologetically. "Ill get him." 
I hop down and stumble along the track behind him, 
soaking my slippers with snow, as he leads me 
beyond the end of the train so we will not be 
overheard. Then he turns on me. 

"What?" 

I tell him everything. About the president's visit, 
about Gale, about how we're all going to die if I fail. 

His face sobers, grows older in the glow of the red tail- 
lights. "Then you can't fail." 

"If you could just help me get through this trip — " I 
begin. 

"No, Katniss, it's not just this trip," he says. "What do 
you mean?" I say. 

"Even if you pull it off, they'll be back in another few 
months to take us all to the Games. You and Peeta, 
you'll be mentors now, every year from here on out. 
And every year they'll revisit the romance and 
broadcast the details of your private life, and you'll 
never, ever be able to do anything but live happily 
ever after with that boy." 

The full impact of what he's saying hits me. I will 
never have a life with Gale, even if I want to. I will 
never be allowed to live alone. I will have to be forever 
in love with Peeta. The Capitol will insist on it. Ill 
have a few years maybe, because I'm still only 
sixteen, to stay with my mother and Prim. And then... 
and then... 

"Do you understand what I mean?" he presses me. 



41 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I nod. He means there's only one future, if I want to 
keep those I love alive and stay alive myself. Ill have 
to marry Peeta. 



42 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



We slog back to the train in silence. In the hallway 
outside my door, Haymitch gives my shoulder a pat 
and says, "You could do a lot worse, you know." He 
heads off to his compartment, taking the smell of 
wine with him. 

In my room, I remove my sodden slippers, my wet 
robe and pajamas. There are more in the drawers but 
I just crawl between the covers of my bed in my 
underclothes. I stare into the darkness, thinking 
about my conversation with Haymitch. Everything he 
said was true about the Capitol's expectations, my 
future with Peeta, even his last comment. Of course, I 
could do a lot worse than Peeta. That isn't really the 
point, though, is it? One of the few freedoms we have 
in District 12 is the right to marry who we want or not 
marry at all. And now even that has been taken away 
from me. I wonder if President Snow will insist we 
have children. If we do, theyll have to face the 
reaping each year. And wouldn't it be something to 
see the child of not one but two victors chosen for the 
arena? Victors' children have been in the ring before. 
It always causes a lot of excitement and generates 
talk about how the odds are not in that family's favor. 
But it happens too frequently to just be about odds. 
Gale's convinced the Capitol does it on purpose, rigs 
the drawings to add extra drama. Given all the 
trouble I've caused, I've probably guaranteed any 
child of mine a spot in the Games. 

I think of Haymitch, unmarried, no family, blotting 
out the world with drink. He could have had his 
choice of any woman in the district. And he chose 
solitude. Not solitude — that sounds too peaceful. More 
like solitary confinement. Was it because, having been 
43 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



in the arena, he knew it was better than risking the 
alternative? I had a taste of that alternative when they 
called Prim's name on reaping day and I watched her 
walk to the stage to her death. But as her sister I 
could take her place, an option forbidden to our 
mother. 

My mind searches frantically for a way out. I can't let 
President Snow condemn me to this. Even if it means 
taking my own life. Before that, though, I'd try to run 
away. What would they do if I simply vanished? 
Disappeared into the woods and never came out? 
Could I even manage to take everyone I love with me, 
start a new life deep in the wild? Highly unlikely but 
not impossible. 

I shake my head to clear it. This is not the time to be 
making wild escape plans. I must focus on the Victory 
Tour. Too many people's fates depend on my giving a 
good show. 

Dawn comes before sleep does, and there's Effie 
rapping on my door. I pull on whatever clothes are at 
the top of the drawer and drag myself down to the 
dining car. I don't see what difference it makes when I 
get up, since this is a travel day, but then it turns out 
that yesterday's makeover was just to get me to the 
train station. Today 111 get the works from my prep 
team. 

"Why? It's too cold for anything to show," I grumble. 
"Not in District Eleven," says Effie. 

District 1 1. Our first stop. I'd rather start in any other 
district, since this was Rue's home. But that's not 
how the Victory Tour works. Usually it kicks off in 12 
and then goes in descending district order to 1 , 
followed by the Capitol. The victor's district is skipped 
44 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



and saved for very last. Since 12 puts on the least 
fabulous celebration — usually just a dinner for the 
tributes and a victory rally in the square, where 
nobody looks like they're having any fun — it's 
probably best to get us out of the way as soon as 
possible. This year, for the first time since Haymitch 
won, the final stop on the tour will be 12, and the 
Capitol will spring for the festivities. 

I try to enjoy the food like Hazelle said. The kitchen 
staff clearly wants to please me. They've prepared my 
favorite, lamb stew with dried plums, among other 
delicacies. Orange juice and a pot of steaming hot 
chocolate wait at my place at the table. So I eat a lot, 
and the meal is beyond reproach, but I can't say I'm 
enjoying it. I'm also annoyed that no one but Effie and 
I has shown up. 

"Where's everybody else?" I ask. 

"Oh, who knows where Haymitch is," says Effie. I 
didn't really expect Haymitch, because he's probably 
just getting to bed. "Cinna was up late working on 
organizing your garment car. He must have over a 
hundred outfits for you. Your evening clothes are 
exquisite. And Peeta's team is probably still asleep." 

"Doesn't he need prepping?" I ask. 

"Not the way you do," Effie replies. 

What does this mean? It means I get to spend the 
morning having the hair ripped off my body while 
Peeta sleeps in. I hadn't thought about it much, but 
in the arena at least some of the boys got to keep 
their body hair whereas none of the girls did. I can 
remember Peeta's now, as I bathed him by the 
stream. Very blond in the sunlight, once the mud and 
blood had been washed away. Only his face remained 
45 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



completely smooth. Not one of the boys grew a beard, 
and many were old enough to. I wonder what they did 
to them. 



If I feel ragged, my prep team seems in worse 
condition, knocking back coffee and sharing brightly 
colored little pills. As far as I can tell, they never get 
up before noon unless there's some sort of national 
emergency, like my leg hair. I was so happy when it 
grew back in, too. As if it were a sign that things 
might be returning to normal. I run my fingers along 
the soft, curly down on my legs and give myself over 
to the team. None of them are up to their usual 
chatter, so I can hear every strand being yanked from 
its follicle. I have to soak in a tub full of a thick, 
unpleasant-smelling solution, while my face and hair 
are plastered with creams. Two more baths follow in 
other, less offensive, concoctions. I'm plucked and 
scoured and massaged and anointed until I'm raw. 

Flavius tilts up my chin and sighs. "It's a shame 
Cinna said no alterations on you." 

"Yes, we could really make you something special," 
says Octavia. 

"When she's older," says Venia almost grimly. "Then 
he'll have to let us." 

Do what? Blow my lips up like President Snow's? 
Tattoo my breasts? Dye my skin magenta and implant 
gems in it? Cut decorative patterns in my face? Give 
me curved talons? Or cat's whiskers? I saw all these 
things and more on the people in the Capitol. Do they 
really have no idea how freakish they look to the rest 
of us? 

The thought of being left to my prep team's fashion 
whims only adds to the miseries competing for my 



46 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



attention — my abused body, my lack of sleep, my 
mandatory marriage, and the terror of being unable to 
satisfy President Snow's demands. By the time I reach 
lunch, where Effie, Cinna, Portia, Haymitch, and 
Peeta have started without me, I'm too weighed down 
to talk. They're raving about the food and how well 
they sleep on trains. Everyone's all full of excitement 
about the tour. Well, everyone but Haymitch. He's 
nursing a hangover and picking at a muffin. I'm not 
really hungry, either, maybe because I loaded up on 
too much rich stuff this morning or maybe because 
I'm so unhappy. I play around with a bowl of broth, 
eating only a spoonful or two. I can't even look at 
Peeta — my designated future husband — although I 
know none of this is his fault. 

People notice, try to bring me into the conversation, 
but I just brush them off. At some point, the train 
stops. Our server reports it will not just be for a fuel 
stop — some part has malfunctioned and must be 
replaced. It will require at least an hour. This sends 
Effie into a state. She pulls out her schedule and 
begins to work out how the delay will impact every 
event for the rest of our lives. Finally I just can't stand 
to listen to her anymore. 

"No one cares, Effie!" I snap. Everyone at the table 
stares at me, even Haymitch, who you'd think would 
be on my side in this matter since Effie drives him 
nuts. I'm immediately put on the defensive. "Well, no 
one does!" I say, and get up and leave the dining car. 

The train suddenly seems stifling and I'm definitely 
queasy now. I find the exit door, force it open — 
triggering some sort of alarm, which I ignore — and 
jump to the ground, expecting to land in snow. But 
the air's warm and balmy against my skin. The trees 
still wear green leaves. How far south have we come 
in a day? I walk along the track, squinting against the 
47 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



bright sunlight, already regretting my words to Effie. 
She's hardly to blame for my current predicament. I 
should go back and apologize. My outburst was the 
height of bad manners, and manners matter deeply to 
her. But my feet continue on along the track, past the 
end of the train, leaving it behind. An hour's delay. I 
can walk at least twenty minutes in one direction and 
make it back with plenty of time to spare. Instead, 
after a couple hundred yards, I sink to the ground 
and sit there, looking into the distance. If I had a bow 
and arrows, would I just keep going? 

After a while I hear footsteps behind me. It'll be 
Haymitch, coming to chew me out. It's not like I don't 
deserve it, but I still don't want to hear it. "I'm not in 
the mood for a lecture," I warn the clump of weeds by 
my shoes. 

"I'll try to keep it brief." Peeta takes a seat beside me. 
"I thought you were Haymitch," I say. 

"No, he's still working on that muffin." I watch as 
Peeta positions his artificial leg. "Bad day, huh?" "It's 
nothing," I say. 

He takes a deep breath. "Look, Katniss, I've been 
wanting to talk to you about the way I acted on the 
train. I mean, the last train. The one that brought us 
home. I knew you had something with Gale. I was 
jealous of him before I even officially met you. And it 
wasn't fair to hold you to anything that happened in 
the Games. I'm sorry." 

His apology takes me by surprise. It's true that Peeta 
froze me out after I confessed that my love for him 
during the Games was something of an act. But I 
don't hold that against him. In the arena, I'd played 
that romance angle for all it was worth. There had 



48 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



been times when I didn't honestly know how I felt 
about him. I still don't, really. 

"I'm sorry, too," I say. I'm not sure for what exactly. 
Maybe because there's a real chance I'm about to 
destroy him. 

"There's nothing for you to be sorry about. You were 
just keeping us alive. But I don't want us to go on like 
this, ignoring each other in real life and falling into 
the snow every time there's a camera around. So I 
thought if I stopped being so, you know, wounded, we 
could take a shot at just being friends," he says. 

All my friends are probably going to end up dead, but 
refusing Peeta wouldn't keep him safe. "Okay," I say. 
His offer does make me feel better. Less duplicitous 
somehow. It would be nice if he'd come to me with 
this earlier, before I knew that President Snow had 
other plans and just being friends was not an option 
for us anymore. But either way, I'm glad we're 
speaking again. 

"So what's wrong?" he asks. 

I can't tell him. I pick at the clump of weeds. 

"Let's start with something more basic. Isn't it strange 
that I know you'd risk your life to save mine... but I 
don't know what your favorite color is?" he says. 

A smile creeps onto my lips. "Green. What's yours?" 

"Orange," he says. 

"Orange? Like Effie's hair?" I say. 

"A bit more muted," he says. "More like... sunset." 



49 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Sunset. I can see it immediately, the rim of the 
descending sun, the sky streaked with soft shades of 
orange. Beautiful. I remember the tiger lily cookie 
and, now that Peeta is talking to me again, it's all I 
can do not to recount the whole story about President 
Snow. But I know Haymitch wouldn't want me to. I'd 
better stick to small talk. 

"You know, everyone's always raving about your 
paintings. I feel bad I haven't seen them," I say. 

"Well, I've got a whole train car full." He rises and 
offers me his hand. "Come on." 

It's good to feel his fingers entwined with mine again, 
not for show but in actual friendship. We walk back 
to the train hand in hand. At the door, I remember. 
"I've got to apologize to Effie first." 

"Don't be afraid to lay it on thick," Peeta tells me. 

So when we go back to the dining car, where the 
others are still at lunch, I give Effie an apology that I 
think is overkill but in her mind probably just 
manages to compensate for my breach of etiquette. To 
her credit, Effie accepts graciously. She says it's clear 
I'm under a lot of pressure. And her comments about 
the necessity of someone attending to the schedule 
only last about five minutes. Really, I've gotten off 
easily. 

When Effie finishes, Peeta leads me down a few cars 
to see his paintings. I don't know what I expected. 
Larger versions of the flower cookies maybe. But this 
is something entirely different. Peeta has painted the 
Games. 

Some you wouldn't get right away, if you hadn't been 
with him in the arena yourself. Water dripping 



50 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



through the cracks in our cave. The dry pond bed. A 
pair of hands, his own, digging for roots. Others any 
viewer would recognize. The golden horn called the 
Cornucopia. Clove arranging the knives inside her 
jacket. One of the mutts, unmistakably the blond, 
green-eyed one meant to be Glimmer, snarling as it 
makes its way toward us. And me. I am everywhere. 
High up in a tree. Beating a shirt against the stones 
in the stream. Lying unconscious in a pool of blood. 
And one I can't place — perhaps this is how I looked 
when his fever was high — emerging from a silver gray 
mist that matches my eyes exactly. 

"What do you think?" he asks. 

"I hate them," I say. I can almost smell the blood, the 
dirt, the unnatural breath of the mutt. "All I do is go 
around trying to forget the arena and you've brought 
it, back to life. How do you remember these things so 
exactly?" 

"I see them every night," he says. 

I know what he means. Nightmares — which I was no 
stranger to before the Games — now plague me 
whenever I sleep. But the old standby, the one of my 
father being blown to bits in the mines, is rare. 
Instead I relive versions of what happened in the 
arena. My worthless attempt to save Rue. Peeta 
bleeding to death. Glimmer's bloated body 
disintegrating in my hands. Cato's horrific end with 
the muttations. These are the most frequent visitors. 
"Me, too. Does it help? To paint them out?" 

"I don't know. I think I'm a little less afraid of going to 
sleep at night, or I tell myself I am," he says. "But 
they haven't gone anywhere." 



51 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Maybe they won't. Haymitch's haven't." Haymitch 
doesn't say so, but I'm sure this is why he doesn't like 
to sleep in the dark. 

"No. But for me, it's better to wake up with a 
paintbrush than a knife in my hand," he says. "So 
you really hate them?" 

"Yes. But they're extraordinary. Really," I say. And 
they are. But I don't want to look at them anymore. 
"Want to see my talent? Cinna did a great job on it." 

Peeta laughs. "Later." The train lurches forward, and I 
can see the land moving past us through the window. 
"Come on, we're almost to District Eleven. Let's go 
take a look at it." 

We go down to the last car on the train. There are 
chairs and couches to sit on, but what's wonderful is 
that the back windows retract into the ceiling so 
you're riding outside, in the fresh air, and you can see 
a wide sweep of the landscape. Huge open fields with 
herds of dairy cattle grazing in them. So unlike our 
own heavily wooded home. 

We slow slightly and I think we might be coming in 
for another stop, when a fence rises up before us. 
Towering at least thirty-five feet in the air and topped 
with wicked coils of barbed wire, it makes ours back 
in District 12 look childish. My eyes quickly inspect 
the base, which is lined with enormous metal plates. 
There would be no burrowing under those, no 
escaping to hunt. Then I see the watchtowers, placed 
evenly apart, manned with armed guards, so out of 
place among the fields of wildflowers around them. 

"That's something different," says Peeta. 



52 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Rue did give me the impression that the rules in 
District 1 1 were more harshly enforced. But I never 
imagined something like this. 

Now the crops begin, stretched out as far as the eye 
can see. Men, women, and children wearing straw 
hats to keep off the sun straighten up, turn our way, 
take a moment to stretch their backs as they watch 
our train go by. I can see orchards in the distance, 
and I wonder if that's where Rue would have worked, 
collecting the fruit from the slimmest branches at the 
tops of the trees. Small communities of shacks — by 
comparison the houses in the Seam are upscale — 
spring up here and there, but they're all deserted. 
Every hand must be needed for the harvest. 

On and on it goes. I can't believe the size of District 
1 1 . "How many people do you think live here?" Peeta 
asks. I shake my head. In school they refer to it as a 
large district, that's all. No actual figures on the 
population. But those kids we see on camera waiting 
for the reaping each year, they can't be but a 
sampling of the ones who actually live here. What do 
they do? Have preliminary drawings? Pick the 
winners ahead of time and make sure they're in the 
crowd? How exactly did Rue end up on that stage 
with nothing but the wind offering to take her place? 

I begin to weary of the vastness, the endlessness of 
this place. When Effie comes to tell us to dress, I 
don't object. 

I go to my compartment and let the prep team do my 
hair and makeup. Cinna comes in with a pretty 
orange frock patterned with autumn leaves. I think 
how much Peeta will like the color. 

Effie gets Peeta and me together and goes through the 

day's program one last time. In some districts the 

53 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



victors ride through the city while the residents cheer. 
But in 1 1 — maybe because there's not much of a city 
to begin with, things being so spread out, or maybe 
because they don't want to waste so many people 
while the harvest is on — the public appearance is 
confined to the square. It takes place before their 
Justice Building, a huge marble structure. Once, it 
must have been a thing of beauty, but time has taken 
its toll. Even on television you can see ivy overtaking 
the crumbling facade, the sag of the roof. The square 
itself is ringed with run-down storefronts, most of 
which are abandoned. Wherever the well-to-do live in 
District 1 1, it's not here. 

Our entire public performance will be staged outside 
on what Effie refers to as the verandah, the tiled 
expanse between the front doors and the stairs that's 
shaded by a roof supported by columns. Peeta and I 
will be introduced, the mayor of 1 1 will read a speech 
in our honor, and well respond with a scripted thank- 
you provided by the Capitol. If a victor had any 
special allies among the dead tributes, it is considered 
good form to add a few personal comments as well. I 
should say something about Rue, and Thresh, too, 
really, but every time I tried to write it at home, I 
ended up with a blank paper staring me in the face: 
It's hard for me to talk about them without getting 
emotional. Fortunately, Peeta has a little something 
worked up, and with some slight alterations, it can 
count for both of us. At the end of the ceremony, we'll 
be presented with some sort of plaque, and then we 
can withdraw to the Justice Building, where a special 
dinner will be served. 

As the train is pulling into the District 1 1 station, 
Cinna puts the finishing touches on my outfit, 
switching my orange hairband for one of metallic gold 
and securing the mockingjay pin I wore in the arena 
to my dress. There's no welcoming, committee on the 
54 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



platform, just a squad of eight Peacekeepers who 
direct us into the back of an armored truck. Effie 
sniffs as the door clanks closed behind us. "Really, 
you'd think we were all criminals," she says. 

Not all of us, Effie. Just me, I think. 

The truck lets us out at the back of the Justice 
Building. We're hurried inside. I can smell an 
excellent meal being prepared, but it doesn't block 
out the odors of mildew and rot. They've left us no 
time to look around. As. we make a beeline for the 
front entrance, I can hear the anthem beginning 
outside in the square. Someone clips a microphone on 
me. Peeta takes my left hand. The mayor's 
introducing us as the massive doors open with a 
groan. 

"Big smiles!" Effie says, and gives us a nudge. Our 
feet start moving forward. 

This is it. This is where I have to convince everybody 
how in love I am with Peeta, I think. The solemn 
ceremony is pretty tightly mapped out, so I'm not sure 
how to do it. It's not a time for kissing, but maybe I 
can work one in. 

There's loud applause, but none of the other 
responses we got in the Capitol, the cheers and 
whoops and whistles. We walk across the shaded 
verandah until the roof runs out and we're standing 
at the top of a big flight of marble stairs in the glaring 
sun. As my eyes adjust, I see the buildings on the 
square have been hung with banners that help cover 
up their neglected state. It's packed with people, but 
again, just a fraction of the number who live here. 

As usual, a special platform has been constructed at 

the bottom of the stage for the families of the dead 

55 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



tributes. On Thresh's side, there's only an old woman 
with a hunched back and a tall, muscular girl I'm 
guessing is his sister. On Rue's... I'm not prepared for 
Rue's family. Her parents, whose faces are still fresh 
with sorrow. Her five younger siblings, who resemble 
her so closely. The slight builds, the luminous brown 
eyes. They form a flock of small dark birds. 

The applause dies out and the mayor gives the speech 
in our honor. Two little girls come up with 
tremendous bouquets of flowers. Peeta does his part 
of the scripted reply and then I find my lips moving to 
conclude it. Fortunately my mother and Prim have 
drilled me so I can do it in my sleep. 

Peeta had his personal comments written on a card, 
but he doesn't pull it out. Instead he speaks in his 
simple, winning style about Thresh and Rue making 
it to the final eight, about how they both kept me 
alive — thereby keeping him alive — and about how this 
is a debt we can never repay. And then he hesitates 
before adding something that wasn't written on the 
card. Maybe because he thought Effie might make 
him remove it. "It can in no way replace your losses, 
but as a token of our thanks we'd like for each of the 
tributes' families from District Eleven to receive one 
month of our winnings every year for the duration of 
our lives." 

The crowd can't help but respond with gasps and 
murmurs. There is no precedent for what Peeta has 
done. I don't even know if it's legal. He probably 
doesn't know, either, so he didn't ask in case it isn't. 
As for the families, they just stare at us in shock. 
Their lives were changed forever when Thresh and 
Rue were lost, but this gift will change them again. A 
month of tribute winnings can easily provide for a 
family for a year. As long as we live, they will not 
hunger. 

56 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I look at Peeta and he gives me a sad smile. I hear 
Haymitch's voice. "You could do a lot worse." At this 
moment, it's impossible to imagine how I could do 
any better. The gift... it is perfect. So when I rise up 
on tiptoe to kiss him, it doesn't seem forced at all. 

The mayor steps forward and presents us each with a 
plaque that's so large I have to put down my bouquet 
to hold it. The ceremony's about to end when I notice 
one of Rue's sisters staring at me. She must be about 
nine and is almost an exact replica of Rue, down to 
the way she stands with her arms slightly extended. 
Despite the good news about the winnings, she's not 
happy. In fact, her look is reproachful. Is it because I 
didn't save Rue? 

No. It's because I still haven't thanked her, I think. 

A wave of shame rushes through me. The girl is right. 
How can I stand here, passive and mute, leaving all 
the words to Peeta? If she had won, Rue would never 
have let my death go unsung. I remember how I took 
care in the arena to cover her with flowers, to make 
sure her loss did not go unnoticed. But that gesture 
will mean nothing if I don't support it now. 

"Wait!" I stumble forward, pressing the plaque to my 
chest. My allotted time for speaking has come and 
gone, but I must say something. I owe too much. And 
even if I had pledged all my winnings to the families, 
it would not excuse my silence today. "Wait, please." I 
don't know how to start, but once I do, the words 
rush from my lips as if they've been forming in the 
back of my mind for a long time. 

"I want to give my thanks to the tributes of District 
Eleven," I say. I look at the pair of women on Thresh's 
side. "I only ever spoke to Thresh one time. Just long 
enough for him to spare my life. I didn't know him, 
57 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



but I always respected him. For his power. For his 
refusal to play the Games on anyone's terms but his 
own. The Careers wanted him to team up with them 
from the beginning, but he wouldn't do it. I respected 
him for that." 

For the first time the old hunched woman — is she 
Thresh's grandmother? — raises her head and the 
trace of a smile plays on her lips. 

The crowd has fallen silent now, so silent that I 
wonder how they manage it. They must all be holding 
their breath. 

I turn to Rue's family. "But I feel as if I did know Rue, 
and she'll always be with me. Everything beautiful 
brings her to mind. I see her in the yellow flowers that 
grow in the Meadow by my house. I see her in the 
mockingj ays that sing in the trees. But most of all, I 
see her in my sister, Prim." My voice is undependable, 
but I am almost finished. "Thank you for your 
children." I raise my chin to address the crowd. "And 
thank you all for the bread." 

I stand there, feeling broken and small, thousands of 
eyes trained on me. There's a long pause. Then, from 
somewhere in the crowd, someone whistles Rue's 
four-note mocking-jay tune. The one that signaled the 
end of the workday in the orchards. The one that 
meant safety in the arena. By the end of the tune, I 
have found the whistler, a wizened old man in a faded 
red shirt and overalls. His eyes meet mine. 

What happens next is not an accident. It is too well 
executed to be spontaneous, because it happens in 
complete unison. Every person in the crowd presses 
the three middle fingers of their left hand against 
their lips and extends them to me. It's our sign from 
District 12, the last good-bye I gave Rue in the arena. 
58 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



If I hadn't spoken to President Snow, this gesture 
might move me to tears. But with his recent orders to 
calm the districts fresh in my ears, it fills me with 
dread. What will he think of this very public salute to 
the girl who defied the Capitol? 

The full impact of what I've done hits me. It was not 
intentional — I only meant to express my thanks — but 
I have elicited something dangerous. An act of dissent 
from the people of District 1 1 . This is exactly the kind 
of thing I am supposed to be defusing! 

I try to think of something to say to undermine what 
has just happened, to negate it, but I can hear the 
slight burst of static indicating my microphone has 
been cut off and the mayor has taken over. Peeta and 
I acknowledge a final round of applause. He leads me 
back toward the doors, unaware that anything has 
gone wrong. 

I feel funny and have to stop for a moment. Little bits 
of bright sunshine dance before my eyes. "Are you all 
right?" Peeta asks. 

"Just dizzy. The sun was so bright," I say. I see his 
bouquet. "I forgot my flowers," I mumble. "I'll get 
them," he says. "I can," I answer. 

We would be safe inside the Justice Building by now, 
if I hadn't stopped, if I hadn't left my flowers. Instead, 
from the deep shade of the verandah, we see the 
whole thing. 

A pair of Peacekeepers dragging the old man who 
whistled to the top of the steps. Forcing him to his 
knees before the crowd. And putting a bullet through 
his head. 



59 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



The man has only just crumpled to the ground when 
a wall of white Peacekeeper uniforms blocks our view. 
Several of the soldiers have automatic weapons held 
lengthwise as they push us back toward the door. 

"We're going!" says Peeta, shoving the Peacekeeper 
who's pressing on me. "We get it, all right? Come on, 
Katniss." His arm encircles me and guides me back 
into the Justice Building. The Peacekeepers follow a 
pace or two behind us. The moment we're inside, the 
doors slam shut and we hear the Peacekeepers' boots 
moving back toward the crowd. 

Haymitch, Effie, Portia, and Cinna wait under a 
static-filled screen that's mounted on the wall, their 
faces tight with anxiety. 

"What happened?" Effie hurries over. "We lost the feed 
just after Katniss 's beautiful speech, and then 
Haymitch said he thought he heard a gun fire, and I 
said it was ridiculous, but who knows? There are 
lunatics everywhere!" 

"Nothing happened, Effie. An old truck backfired," 
says Peeta evenly. 

Two more shots. The door doesn't muffle their sound 
much. Who was that? Thresh's grandmother? One of 
Rue's little sisters? 

"Both of you. With me," says Haymitch. Peeta and I 
follow him, leaving the others behind. The 
Peacekeepers who are stationed around the Justice 
Building take little interest in our movements now 
that we are safely inside. We ascend a magnificent 
60 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



curved marble staircase. At the top, there's a long hall 
with worn carpet on the floor. Double doors stand 
open, welcoming us into the first room we encounter. 
The ceiling must be twenty feet high. Designs of fruit 
and flowers are carved into the molding and small, fat 
children with wings look down at us from every angle. 
Vases of blossoms give off a cloying scent that makes 
my eyes itch. Our evening clothes hang on racks 
against the wall. This room has been prepared for our 
use, but we're barely there long enough to drop off 
our gifts. Then Haymitch yanks the microphones from 
our chests, stuffs them beneath a couch cushion, and 
waves us on. 

As far as I know, Haymitch has only been here once, 
when he was on his Victory Tour decades ago. But he 
must have a remarkable memory or reliable instincts, 
because he leads us up through a maze of twisting 
staircases and increasingly narrow halls. At times he 
has to stop and force a door. By the protesting squeak 
of the hinges you can tell it's been a long time since it 
was opened. Eventually we climb a ladder to a 
trapdoor. When Haymitch pushes it aside, we find 
ourselves in the dome of the Justice Building. It's a 
huge place filled with broken furniture, piles of books 
and ledgers, and rusty weapons. The coat of dust 
blanketing everything is so thick it's clear it hasn't 
been disturbed for years. Light struggles to filter in 
through four grimy square windows set in the sides of 
the dome. Haymitch kicks the trapdoor shut and 
turns on us. "What happened?" he asks. 

Peeta relates all that occurred in the square. The 
whistle, the salute, our hesitation on the verandah, 
the murder of the old man. "What's going on, 
Haymitch?" 

"It will be better coming from you," Haymitch says to 
me. 



61 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I don't agree. I think it will be a hundred times worse 
coming from me. But I tell Peeta everything as calmly 
as I can. About President Snow, the unrest in the 
districts. I don't even omit the kiss with Gale. I lay out 
how we are all in jeopardy, how the whole country is 
in jeopardy because of my trick with the berries. "I 
was supposed to fix things on this tour. Make 
everyone who had doubted believe I acted out of love. 
Calm things down. But obviously, all I've done today 
is. get three people killed, and now everyone in the 
square will be punished." I feel so sick that I have to 
sit down on a couch, despite the exposed springs and 
stuffing. 

"Then I made things worse, too. By giving the money," 
says Peeta. Suddenly he strikes out at a lamp that 
sits precariously on a crate and knocks it across the 
room, where it shatters against the floor. "This has to 
stop. Right now. This — this — game you two play, 
where you tell each other secrets but keep them from 
me like I'm too inconsequential or stupid or weak to 
handle them." 

"It's not like that, Peeta—" I begin. 

"It's exactly like that!" he yells at me. "I have people I 
care about, too, Katniss! Family and friends back in 
District Twelve who will be just as dead as yours if we 
don't pull this thing off. So, after all we went through 
in the arena, don't I even rate the truth from you?" 

"You're always so reliably good, Peeta," says 
Haymitch. "So smart about how you present yourself 
before the cameras. I didn't want to disrupt that." 

"Well, you overestimated me. Because I really screwed 
up today. What do you think is going to happen to 
Rue's and Thresh's families? Do you think theyH get 
their share of our winnings? Do you think I gave them 
62 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



a bright future? Because I think they'll be lucky if 
they survive the day!" Peeta sends something else 
flying, a statue. I've never seen him like this. 

"He's right, Haymitch," I say. "We were wrong not to 
tell him. Even back in the Capitol." 

"Even in the arena, you two had some sort of system 
worked out, didn't you?" asks Peeta. His voice is 
quieter now. "Something I wasn't part of." 

"No. Not officially. I just could tell what Haymitch 
wanted me to do by what he sent, or didn't send," I 
say. 

"Well, I never had that opportunity. Because he never 
sent me anything until you showed up," says Peeta. 

I haven't thought much about this. How it must have 
looked from Peeta's perspective when I appeared in 
the arena having received burn medicine and bread 
when he, who was at death's door, had gotten 
nothing. Like Haymitch was keeping me alive at his 
expense. 

"Look, boy — " Haymitch begins. 

"Don't bother, Haymitch. I know you had to choose 
one of us. And I'd have wanted it to be her. But this is 
something different. People are dead out there. More 
will follow unless we're very good. We all know I'm 
better than Katniss in front of the cameras. No one 
needs to coach me on what to say. But I have to know 
what I'm walking into," says Peeta. 

"From now on, you'll be fully informed," Haymitch 
promises. 



63 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"I better be," says Peeta. He doesn't even bother to 
look at me before he leaves. 

The dust he disrupted billows up and looks for new 
places to land. My hair, my eyes, my shiny gold pin. 

"Did you choose me, Haymitch?" I ask. 

"Yeah," he says. 

"Why? You like him better," I say. 

"That's true. But remember, until they changed the 
rules, I could only hope to get one of you out of there 
alive," he says. "I thought since he was determined to 
protect you, well, between the three of us, we might 
be able to bring you home." 

"Oh" is all I can think to say. 

"You'll see, the choices you'll have to make. If we 
survive this," says Haymitch. "Youll learn." 

Well, I've learned one thing today. This place is not a 
larger version of District 12. Our fence is unguarded 
and rarely charged. Our Peacekeepers are unwelcome 
but less brutal. Our hardships evoke more fatigue 
than fury. Here in 1 1 , they suffer more acutely and 
feel more desperation. President Snow is right. A 
spark could be enough to set them ablaze. 

Everything is happening too fast for me to process it. 
The warning, the shootings, the recognition that I 
may have set something of great consequence in 
motion. The whole thing is so improbable. And it 
would be one thing if I had planned to stir things up, 
but given the circumstances... how on earth did I 
cause so much trouble? 



64 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Come on. We've got a dinner to attend," says 
Haymitch. 



I stand in the shower as long as they let me before I 
have to come out to be readied. The prep team seems 
oblivious to the events of the day. They're all excited 
about the dinner. In the districts they're important 
enough to attend, whereas back in the Capitol they 
almost never score invitations to prestigious parties. 
While they try to predict what dishes will be served, I 
keep seeing the old man's head being blown off. I 
don't even pay attention to what anyone is doing to 
me until I'm about to leave and I see myself in the 
mirror. A pale pink strapless dress brushes my shoes. 
My hair is pinned back from my face and falling down 
my back in a shower of ringlets. 

Cinna comes up behind me and arranges a 
shimmering silver wrap around my shoulders. He 
catches my eye in the mirror. "Like it?" 

"It's beautiful. As always," I say. 

"Let's see how it looks with a smile," he says gently. 
It's his reminder that in a minute, there will be 
cameras again. I manage to raise the corners of my 
lips. "There we go." 

When we all assemble to go down to the dinner, I can 
see Effie is out of sorts. Surely, Haymitch hasn't told 
her about what happened in the square. I wouldn't be 
surprised if Cinna and Portia know, but there seems 
to be an unspoken agreement to leave Effie out of the 
bad-news loop. It doesn't take long to hear about the 
problem, though. 

Effie runs through the evening's schedule, then tosses 
it aside. "And then, thank goodness, we can all get on 
that train and get out of here," she says. 



65 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Is something wrong, Effie?" asks Cinna. 

"I don't like the way we've been treated. Being stuffed 
into trucks and barred from the platform. And then, 
about an hour ago, I decided to look around the 
Justice Building. I'm something of an expert in 
architectural design, you know," she says. 

"Oh, yes, I've heard that," says Portia before the 
pause gets too long. 

"So, I was just having a peek around because district 
ruins are going to be all the rage this year, when two 
Peacemakers showed up and ordered me back to our 
quarters. One of them actually poked me with her 
gun!" says Effie. 

I can't help thinking this is the direct result of 
Haymitch, Peeta, and me disappearing earlier in the 
day. It's a little reassuring, actually, to think that 
Haymitch might have been right. That no one would 
have been monitoring the dusty dome where we 
talked. Although I bet they are now. 

Effie looks so distressed that I spontaneously give her 
a hug. "That's awful, Effie. Maybe we shouldn't go to 
the dinner at all. At least until they've apologized." I 
know shell never agree to this, but she brightens 
considerably at the suggestion, at the validation of 
her complaint. 

"No, I'll manage. It's part of my job to weather the ups 
and downs. And we can't let you two miss your 
dinner," she says. "But thank you for the offer, 
Katniss." 

Effie arranges us in formation for our entrance. First 
the prep teams, then her, the stylists, Haymitch. 
Peeta and I, of course, bring up the rear. 



66 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Somewhere below, musicians begin to play. As the 
first wave of our little procession begins down the 
steps, Peeta and I join hands. 

"Haymitch says I was wrong to yell at you. You were 
only operating under his instructions," says Peeta. 
"And it isn't as if I haven't kept things from you in the 
past." 

I remember the shock of hearing Peeta confess his 
love for me in front of all of Panem. Haymitch had 
known about that and not told me. "I think I broke a 
few things myself after that interview." 

"Just an urn," he says. 

"And your hands. There's no point to it anymore, 
though, is there? Not being straight with each other?" 
I say. 

"No point," says Peeta. We stand at the top of the 
stairs, giving Haymitch a fifteen- step lead as Effie 
directed. "Was that really the only time you kissed 
Gale?" 

I'm so startled I answer. "Yes." With all that has 
happened today, has that question actually been 
preying on him? 

"That's fifteen. Let's do it," he says. 

A light hits us, and I put on the most dazzling smile I 
can. 

We descend the steps and are sucked into what 
becomes an indistinguishable round of dinners, 
ceremonies, and train rides. Each day it's the same. 
Wake up. Get dressed. Ride through cheering crowds. 
Listen to a speech in our honor. Give a thank-you 



67 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



speech in return, but only the one the Capitol gave 
us, never any personal additions now. Sometimes a 
brief tour: a glimpse of the sea in one district, 
towering forests in another, ugly factories, fields of 
wheat, stinking refineries. Dress in evening clothes. 
Attend dinner. Train. 

During ceremonies, we are solemn and respectful but 
always linked together, by our hands, our arms. At 
dinners, we are borderline delirious in our love for 
each other. We kiss, we dance, we get caught trying to 
sneak away to be alone. On the train, we are quietly 
miserable as we try to assess what effect we might be 
having. 

Even without our personal speeches to trigger 
dissent — needless to say the ones we gave in District 
1 1 were edited out before the event was broadcast — 
you can feel something in the air, the rolling boil of a 
pot about to run over. Not everywhere. Some crowds 
have the weary-cattle feel that I know District 12 
usually projects at the victors' ceremonies. But in 
others — particularly 8, 4, and 3 — there is genuine 
elation in the faces of the people at the sight of us, 
and under the elation, fury. When they chant my 
name, it is more of a cry for vengeance than a cheer. 
When the Peacekeepers move in to quiet an unruly 
crowd, it presses back instead of retreating. And I 
know that there's nothing I could ever do to change 
this. No show of love, however believable, will turn 
this tide. If my holding out those berries was an act of 
temporary insanity, then these people will embrace 
insanity, too. 

Cinna begins to take in my clothes around the waist. 
The prep team frets over the circles under my eyes. 
Effie starts giving me pills to sleep, but they don't 
work. Not well enough. I drift off only to be roused by 
nightmares that have increased in number and 
68 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



intensity. Peeta, who spends much of the night 
roaming the train, hears me screaming as I struggle 
to break out of the haze of drugs that merely prolong 
the horrible dreams. He manages to wake me and 
calm me down. Then he climbs into bed to hold me 
until I fall back to sleep. After that, I refuse the pills. 
But every night I let him into my bed. We manage the 
darkness as we did in the arena, wrapped in each 
other's arms, guarding against dangers that can 
descend at any moment. Nothing else happens, but 
our arrangement quickly becomes a subject of gossip 
on the train. 

When Effie brings it up to me, I think, Good. Maybe it 
will get back to President Snow. I tell her well make 
an effort to be more discreet, but we don't. 

The back-to-back appearances in 2 and 1 are their 
own special kind of awful. Cato and Clove, the 
tributes from District 2, might have both made it 
home if Peeta and I hadn't. I personally killed the girl, 
Glimmer, and the boy from District 1 . As I try to avoid 
looking at his family, I learn that his name was 
Marvel. How did I never know that? I suppose that 
before the Games I didn't pay attention, and 
afterward I didn't want to know. 

By the time we reach the Capitol, we are desperate. 
We make endless appearances to adoring crowds. 
There is no danger of an uprising here among the 
privileged, among those whose names are never 
placed in the reaping balls, whose children never die 
for the supposed crimes committed generations ago. 
We don't need to convince anybody in the Capitol of 
our love but hold to the slim hope that we can still 
reach some of those we failed to convince in the 
districts. Whatever we do seems too little, too late. 



69 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Back in our old quarters in the Training Center, I'm 
the one who suggests the public marriage proposal. 
Peeta agrees to do it but then disappears to his room 
for a long time. Haymitch tells me to leave him alone. 

"I thought he wanted it, anyway," I say. 

"Not like this," Haymitch says. "He wanted it to be 
real." 

I go back to my room and lie under the covers, trying 
not to think of Gale and thinking of nothing else. 

That night, on the stage before the Training Center, 
we bubble our way through a list of questions. Caesar 
Flickerman, in his twinkling midnight blue suit, his 
hair, eyelids, and lips still dyed powder blue, 
flawlessly guides us through the interview. When he 
asks us about the future, Peeta gets down on one 
knee, pours out his heart, and begs me to marry him. 
I, of course, accept. Caesar is beside himself, the 
Capitol audience is hysterical, shots of crowds around 
Panem show a country besotted with happiness. 

President Snow himself makes a surprise visit to 
congratulate us. He clasps Peeta's hand and gives 
him an approving slap on the shoulder. He embraces 
me, enfolding me in the smell of blood and roses, and 
plants a puffy kiss on my cheek. When he pulls back, 
his fingers digging into my arms, his face smiling into 
mine, I dare to raise my eyebrows. They ask what my 
lips can't. Did I do it? Was it enough? Was giving 
everything over to you, keeping up the game, promising 
to marry Peeta enough? 

In answer, he gives an almost imperceptible shake of 
his head. 



70 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



6 



In that one slight motion, I see the end of hope, the 
beginning of the destruction of everything I hold dear 
in the world. I can't guess what form my punishment 
will take, how wide the net will be cast, but when it is 
finished, there will most likely be nothing left. So you 
would think that at this moment, I would be in utter 
despair. Here's what's strange. The main thing I feel is 
a sense of relief. That I can give up this game. That 
the question of whether I can succeed in this venture 
has been answered, even if that answer is a 
resounding no. That if desperate times call for 
desperate measures, then I am free to act as 
desperately as I wish. 

Only not here, not quite yet. It's essential to get back 
to District 12, because the main part of any plan will 
include my mother and sister, Gale and his family. 
And Peeta, if I can get him to come with us. I add 
Haymitch to the list. These are the people I must take 
with me when I escape into the wild. How I will 
convince them, where we will go in the dead of winter, 
what it will take to evade capture are unanswered 
questions. But at least now I know what I must do. 

So instead of crumpling to the ground and weeping, I 
find myself standing up straighter and with more 
confidence than I have in weeks. My smile, while 
somewhat insane, is not forced. And when President 
Snow silences the audience and says, "What do you 
think about us throwing them a wedding right here in 
the Capitol?" I pull off girl-almost-catatonic-with-joy 
without a hitch. 

Caesar Flickerman asks if the president has a date in 
mind. 



71 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Oh, before we set a date, we better clear it with 
Katniss's mother," says the president. The audience 
gives a big laugh and the president puts his arm 
around me. "Maybe if the whole country puts its mind 
to it, we can get you married before you're thirty." 

"You 11 probably have to pass a new law," I say with a 
giggle. 

"If that's what it takes," says the president with 
conspiratorial good humor. 

Oh, the fun we two have together. 

The party, held in the banquet room of President 
Snow's mansion, has no equal. The forty-foot ceiling 
has been transformed into the night sky, and the 
stars look exactly as they do at home. I suppose they 
look the same from the Capitol, but who would know? 
There's always too much light from the city to see the 
stars here. About halfway between the floor and the 
ceiling, musicians float on what look like fluffy white 
clouds, but I can't see what holds them aloft. 
Traditional dining tables have been replaced by 
innumerable stuffed sofas and chairs, some 
surrounding fireplaces, others beside fragrant flower 
gardens or ponds filled with exotic fish, so that people 
can eat and drink and do whatever they please in the 
utmost comfort. There's a large tiled area in the 
center of the room that serves as everything from a 
dance floor, to a stage for the performers who come 
and go, to another spot to mingle with the 
flamboyantly dressed guests. 

But the real star of the evening is the food. Tables 
laden with delicacies line the walls. Everything you 
can think of, and things you have never dreamed of, 
lie in wait. Whole roasted cows and pigs and goats 
still turning on spits. Huge platters of fowl stuffed 
72 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



with savory fruits and nuts. Ocean creatures drizzled 
in sauces or begging to be dipped in spicy 
concoctions. Countless cheeses, breads, vegetables, 
sweets, waterfalls of wine, and streams of spirits that 
flicker with flames. 

My appetite has returned with my' desire to fight 
back. After weeks of feeling too worried to eat, I'm 
famished. 

"I want to taste everything in the room," I tell Peeta. 

I can see him trying to read my expression, to figure 
out my transformation. Since he doesn't know that 
President Snow thinks I have failed, he can only 
assume that I think we have succeeded. Perhaps even 
that I have some genuine happiness at our 
engagement. His eyes reflect his puzzlement but only 
briefly, because we're on camera. "Then you'd better 
pace yourself," he says. 

"Okay, no more than one bite of each dish," I say. My 
resolve is almost immediately broken at the first 
table, which has twenty or so soups, when I 
encounter a creamy pumpkin brew sprinkled with 
slivered nuts and tiny black seeds. "I could just eat 
this all night!" I exclaim. But I don't. I weaken again 
at a clear green broth that I can only describe as 
tasting like springtime, and again when I try a frothy 
pink soup dotted with raspberries. 

Faces appear, names are exchanged, pictures taken, 
kisses brushed on cheeks. Apparently my mockingjay 
pin has spawned a new fashion sensation, because 
several people come up to show me their accessories. 
My bird has been replicated on belt buckles, 
embroidered into silk lapels, even tattooed in intimate 
places. Everyone wants to wear the winner's token. I 
can only imagine how nuts that makes President 
73 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Snow. But what can he do? The Games were such a 
hit here, where the berries were only a symbol of a 
desperate girl trying to save her lover. 

Peeta and I make no effort to find company but are 
constantly sought out. We are what no one wants to 
miss at the party. I act delighted, but I have zero 
interest in these Capitol people. They are only 
distractions from the food. 

Every table presents new temptations, and even on 
my restricted one-taste-per-dish regimen, I begin 
filling up quickly. I pick up a small roasted bird, bite 
into it, and my tongue floods with orange sauce. 
Delicious. But I make Peeta eat the remainder 
because I want to keep tasting things, and the idea of 
throwing away food, as I see so many people doing so 
casually, is abhorrent to me. After about ten tables 
I'm stuffed, and we've only sampled a small number 
of the dishes available. 

Just then my prep team descends on us. They're 
nearly incoherent between the alcohol they've 
consumed and their ecstasy at being at such a grand 
affair. 

"Why aren't you eating?" asks Octavia. 

"I have been, but I can't hold another bite," I say. 
They all laugh as if that's the silliest thing they've ever 
heard. 

"No one lets that stop them!" says Flavius. They lead 
us over to a table that holds tiny stemmed 
wineglasses filled with clear liquid. "Drink this!" 

Peeta picks one up to take a sip and they lose it. 

"Not here!" shrieks Octavia. 



74 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"You have to do it in there," says Venia, pointing to 
doors that lead to the toilets. "Or youH get it all over 
the floor!" 



Peeta looks at the glass again and puts it together. 
"You mean this will make me puke?" 

My prep team laughs hysterically. "Of course, so you 
can keep eating," says Octavia. "I've been in there 
twice already. Everyone does it, or else how would you 
have any fun at a feast?" 

I'm speechless, staring at the pretty little glasses and 
all they imply. Peeta sets his back on the table with 
such precision you'd think it might detonate. "Come 
on, Katniss, let's dance." 

Music filters down from the clouds as he leads me 
away from the team, the table, and out onto the floor. 
We know only a few dances at home, the kind that go 
with fiddle and flute music and require a good deal of 
space. But Effie has shown us some that are popular 
in the Capitol. The music's slow and dreamlike, so 
Peeta pulls me into his arms and we move in a circle 
with practically no steps at all. You could do this 
dance on a pie plate. We're quiet for a while. Then 
Peeta speaks in a strained voice. 

"You go along, thinking you can deal with it, thinking 
maybe they're not so bad, and then you — " He cuts 
himself off. 

All I can think of is the emaciated bodies of the 
children on our kitchen table as my mother 
prescribes what the parents can't give. More food. 
Now that we're rich, shell send some home with 
them. But often in the old days, there was nothing to 
give and the child was past saving, anyway. And here 
in the Capitol they're vomiting for the pleasure of 



75 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



filling their bellies again and again. Not from some 
illness of body or mind, not from spoiled food. It's 
what everyone does at a party. Expected. Part of the 
fun. 

One day when I dropped by to give Hazelle the game, 
Vick was home sick with a bad cough. Being part of 
Gale's family, the kid has to eat better than ninety 
percent of the rest of District 12. But he still spent 
about fifteen minutes talking about how they'd 
opened a can of corn syrup from Parcel Day and each 
had a spoonful on bread and were going to maybe 
have more later in the week. How Hazelle had said he 
could have a bit in a cup of tea to soothe his cough, 
but he wouldn't feel right unless the others had some, 
too. If it's like that at Gale's, what's it like in the other 
houses? 

"Peeta, they bring us here to fight to the death for 
their entertainment," I say. "Really, this is nothing by 
comparison." 

"I know. I know that. It's just sometimes I can't stand 
it anymore. To the point where... I'm not sure what I'll 
do." He pauses, then whispers, "Maybe we were 
wrong, Katniss." 

"About what?" I ask. 

"About trying to subdue things in the districts," he 
says. 

My head turns swiftly from side to side, but no one 
seems to have heard. The camera crew got 
sidetracked at a table of shellfish, and the couples 
dancing around us are either too drunk or too self- 
involved to notice. 



76 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Sorry," he says. He should be. This is no place to be 
voicing such thoughts. 

"Save it for home," I tell him. 

Just then Portia appears with a large man who looks 
vaguely familiar. She introduces him as Plutarch 
Heavensbee, the new Head Gamemaker. Plutarch 
asks Peeta if he can steal me for a dance. Peeta's 
recovered his camera face and good-naturedly passes 
me over, warning the man not to get too attached. 

I don't want to dance with Plutarch Heavensbee. I 
don't want to feel his hands, one resting against mine, 
one on my hip. I'm not used to being touched, except 
by Peeta or my family, and I rank Gamemakers 
somewhere below maggots in terms of creatures I 
want in contact with my skin. But he seems to sense 
this and holds me almost at arm's length as we turn 
on the floor. 

We chitchat about the party, about the 
entertainment, about the food, and then he makes a 
joke about avoiding punch since training. I don't get 
it, and then I realize he's the man who tripped 
backward into the punch bowl when I shot an arrow 
at the Gamemakers during the training session. Well, 
not really. I was shooting an apple out of their roast 
pig's mouth. But I made them jump. 

"Oh, you're one who — " I laugh, remembering him 
splashing back into the punch bowl. 

"Yes. And youll be pleased to know I've never 
recovered," says Plutarch. 

I want to point out that twenty-two dead tributes will 
never recover from the Games he helped create, 



77 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



either. But I only say, "Good. So, you're the Head 
Gamemaker this year? That must be a big honor." 

"Between you and me, there weren't many takers for 
the job," he says. "So much responsibility as to how 
the Games turn out." 

Yeah, the last guy's dead, I think. He must know 
about Seneca Crane, but he doesn't look the least bit 
concerned. "Are you planning the Quarter Quell 
Games already?" I say. 

"Oh, yes. Well, they've been in the works for years, of 
course. Arenas aren't built in a day. But the, shall we 
say, flavor of the Games is being determined now. 
Believe it or not, I've got a strategy meeting tonight," 
he says. 

Plutarch steps back and pulls out a gold watch on a 
chain from a vest pocket. He flips open the lid, sees 
the time, and frowns. "Ill have to be going soon." He 
turns the watch so I can see the face. "It starts at 
midnight." 

"That seems late for — " I say, but then something 
distracts me. Plutarch has run his thumb across the 
crystal face of the watch and for just a moment an 
image appears, glowing as if lit by candlelight. It's 
another mockingjay. Exactly like the pin on my dress. 
Only this one disappears. He snaps the watch closed. 

"That's very pretty," I say. 

"Oh, it's more than pretty. It's one of a kind," he says. 
"If anyone asks about me, say I've gone home to bed. 
The meetings are supposed to be kept secret. But I 
thought it'd be safe to tell you." 

"Yes. Your secret's safe with me," I say. 



78 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



As we shake hands, he gives a small bow, a common 
gesture here in the Capitol. "Well, 111 see you next 
summer at the Games, Katniss. Best wishes on your 
engagement, and good luck with your mother." 

"I'll need it," I say. 

Plutarch disappears and I wander through the crowd, 
looking for Peeta, as strangers congratulate me. On 
my engagement, on my victory at the Games, on my 
choice of lipstick. I respond, but really I'm thinking 
about Plutarch showing off his pretty, one-of-a-kind 
watch to me. There was something strange about it. 
Almost clandestine. But why? Maybe he thinks 
someone else will steal his idea of putting a 
disappearing mockingjay on a watch face. Yes, he 
probably paid a fortune for it and now he can't show 
it to anyone because he's afraid someone will make a 
cheap, knockoff version. Only in the Capitol. 

I find Peeta admiring a table of elaborately decorated 
cakes. Bakers have come in from the kitchen 
especially to talk frosting with him, and you can see 
them tripping over one another to answer his 
questions. At his request, they assemble an 
assortment of little cakes for him to take back to 
District 12, where he can examine their work in quiet. 

"Effie said we have to be on the train at one. I wonder 
what time it is," he says, glancing around. 

"Almost midnight," I reply. I pluck a chocolate flower 
from a cake with my fingers and nibble on it, so 
beyond worrying about manners. 

"Time to say thank you and farewell!" trills Effie at my 
elbow. It's one of those moments when I just love her 
compulsive punctuality. We collect Cinna and Portia, 



79 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



and she escorts us around to say good-bye to 
important people, then herds us to the door. 

"Shouldn't we thank President Snow?" asks Peeta. 
"It's his house." 

"Oh, he's not a big one for parties. Too busy," says 
Effie. "I've already arranged for the necessary notes 
and gifts to be sent to him tomorrow. There you are!" 
Effie gives a little wave to two Capitol attendants who 
have an inebriated Haymitch propped up between 
them. 

We travel through the streets of the Capitol in a car 
with darkened windows. Behind us, another car 
brings the prep teams. The throngs of people 
celebrating are so thick it's slow going. But Effie has 
this all down to a science, and at exactly one o'clock 
we are back on the train and it's pulling out of the 
station. 

Haymitch is deposited in his room. Cinna orders tea 
and we all take seats around the table while Effie 
rattles her schedule papers and reminds us we're still 
on tour. "There's the Harvest Festival in District 
Twelve to think about. So I suggest we drink our tea 
and head straight to bed." No one argues. 

When I open my eyes, it's early afternoon. My head 
rests on Peeta's arm. I don't remember him coming in 
last night. I turn, being careful not to disturb him, 
but he's already awake. 

"No nightmares," he says. 

"What?" I ask. 

"You didn't have any nightmares last night," he says. 



80 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



He's right. For the first time in ages I've slept through 
the night. "I had a dream, though," I say, thinking 
back. "I was following a mockingjay through the 
woods. For a long time. It was Rue, really. I mean, 
when it sang, it had her voice." 

"Where did she take you?" he says, brushing my hair 
off my forehead. 

"I don't know. We never arrived," I say. "But I felt 
happy." 

"Well, you slept like you were happy," he says. 

"Peeta, how come I never know when you're having a 
nightmare?" I say. 

"I don't know. I don't think I cry out or thrash around 
or anything. I just come to, paralyzed with terror," he 
says. 

"You should wake me," I say, thinking about how I 
can interrupt his sleep two or three times on a bad 
night. About how long it can take to calm me down. 

"It's not necessary. My nightmares are usually about 
losing you," he says. "I'm okay once I realize you're 
here." 

Ugh. Peeta makes comments like this in such an 
offhand way, and it's like being hit in the gut. He's 
only answering my question honestly. He's not 
pressing me to reply in kind, to make any declaration 
of love. But I still feel awful, as if I've been using him 
in some terrible way. Have I? I don't know. I only 
know that for the first time, I feel immoral about him 
being here in my bed. Which is ironic since we're 
officially engaged now. 



81 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Be worse when we're home and I'm sleeping alone 
again," he says. 



That's right, we're almost home. 

The agenda for District 12 includes a dinner at Mayor 
Under see's house tonight and a victory rally in the 
square during the Harvest Festival tomorrow. We 
always celebrate the Harvest Festival on the final day 
of the Victory Tour, but usually it means a meal at 
home or with a few friends if you can afford it. This 
year it will be a public affair, and since the Capitol 
will be throwing it, everyone in the whole district will 
have full bellies. 

Most of our prepping will take place at the mayor's 
house, since we're back to being covered in furs for 
outdoor appearances. We're only at the train station 
briefly, to smile and wave as we pile into our car. We 
don't even get to see our families until the dinner 
tonight. 

I'm glad it will be at the mayor's house instead of at 
the Justice Building, where the memorial for my 
father was held, where they took me after the reaping 
for those wrenching goodbyes to my family. The 
Justice Building is too full of sadness. 

But I like Mayor Undersee's house, especially now 
that his daughter, Madge, and I are friends. We 
always were, in a way. It became official when she 
came to say good-bye to me before I left for the 
Games. When she gave me the mockingjay pin for 
luck. After I got home, we started spending time 
together. It turns out Madge has plenty of empty 
hours to fill, too. It was a little awkward at first 
because we didn't know what to do. Other girls our 
age, I've heard them talking about boys, or other girls, 
or clothes. Madge and I aren't gossipy and clothes 



82 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



bore me to tears. But after a few false starts, I realized 
she was dying to go into the woods, so I've taken her 
a couple of times and showed her how to shoot. She's 
trying to teach me the piano, but mostly I like to 
listen to her play. Sometimes we eat at each other's 
houses. Madge likes mine better. Her parents seem 
nice but I don't think she sees a whole lot of them. 
Her father has District 12 to run and her mother gets 
fierce headaches that force her to stay in bed for days. 

"Maybe you should take her to the Capitol," I said 
during one of them. We weren't playing the piano that 
day, because even two floors away the sound caused 
her mother pain. "They can fix her up, I bet." 

"Yes. But you don't go to the Capitol unless they 
invite you," said Madge unhappily. Even the mayor's 
privileges are limited. 

When we reach the mayor's house, I only have time to 
give Madge a quick hug before Effie hustles me off to 
the third floor to get ready. After I'm prepped and 
dressed in a full-length silver gown, I've still got an 
hour to kill before the dinner, so I slip off to find her. 

Madge's bedroom is on the second floor along with 
several guest rooms and her father's study. I stick my 
head in the study to say hello to the mayor but it's 
empty. The television's droning on, and I stop to 
watch shots of Peeta and me at the Capitol party last 
night. Dancing, eating, kissing. This will be playing in 
every household in Panem right now. The audience 
must be sick to death of the star-crossed lovers from 
District 12.1 know I am. 

I'm leaving the room when a beeping noise catches 
my attention. I turn back to see the screen of the 
television go black. Then the words "UPDATE ON 
DISTRICT 8" start flashing. Instinctively I know this is 
83 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



not for my eyes but something intended only for the 
mayor. I should go. Quickly. Instead I find myself 
stepping closer to the television. 

An announcer I've never seen before appears. It's a 
woman with graying hair and a hoarse, authoritative 
voice. She warns that conditions are worsening and a 
Level 3 alert has been called. Additional forces are 
being sent into District 8, and all textile production 
has ceased. 

They cut away from the woman to the main square in 
District 8. I recognize it because I was there only last 
week. There are still banners with my face waving 
from the rooftops. Below them, there's a mob scene. 
The square's packed with screaming people, their 
faces hidden with rags and homemade masks, 
throwing bricks. Buildings burn. Peacekeepers shoot 
into the crowd, killing at random. 

I've never seen anything like it, but I can only be 
witnessing one thing. This is what President Snow 
calls an uprising. 



84 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



7 



A leather bag filled with food and a flask of hot tea. A 
pair of fur-lined gloves that Cinna left behind. Three 
twigs, broken from the naked trees, lying in the snow, 
pointing in the direction I will travel. This is what I 
leave for Gale at our usual meeting place on the first 
Sunday after the Harvest Festival. 

I have continued on through the cold, misty woods, 
breaking a path that will be unfamiliar to Gale but is 
simple for my feet to find. It leads to the lake. I no 
longer trust that our regular rendezvous spot offers 
privacy, and I'll need that and more to spill my guts to 
Gale today. But will he even come? If he doesn't, 111 
have no choice but to risk going to his house in the 
dead of night. There are things he has to know... 
things I need him to help me figure out... 

Once the implications of what I was seeing on Mayor 
Undersee's television hit me, I made for the door and 
started down the hall. Just in time, too, because the 
mayor came up the steps moments later. I gave him a 
wave. 

"Looking for Madge?" he said in a friendly tone. 

"Yes. I want to show her my dress," I said. 

"Well, you know where to find her." Just then, 
another round of beeping came from his study. His 
face turned grave. "Excuse me," he said. He went into 
his study and closed the door tightly. 

I waited in the hall until I had composed myself. 
Reminded myself I must act naturally. Then I found 
Madge in her room, sitting at her dressing table, 
85 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



brushing out her wavy blond hair before a mirror. She 
was in the same pretty white dress she'd worn on 
reaping day. She saw my reflection behind her and 
smiled. "Look at you. Like you came right off the 
streets of the Capitol." 

I stepped in closer. My fingers touched the 
mockingjay. "Even my pin now. Mockingjays are all 
the rage in the Capitol, thanks to you. Are you sure 
you don't want it back?" I asked. 

"Don't be silly, it was a gift," said Madge. She tied 
back her hair in a festive gold ribbon. 

"Where did you get it, anyway?" I asked. 

"It was my aunt's," she said. "But I think it's been in 
the family a long time." 

"It's a funny choice, a mockingjay," I said. "I mean, 
because of what happened in the rebellion. With the 
jabber-jays backfiring on the Capitol and all." 

The jabberjays were muttations, genetically enhanced 
male birds created by the Capitol as weapons to spy 
on rebels in the districts. They could remember and 
repeat long passages of human speech, so they were 
sent into rebel areas to capture our words and return 
them to the Capitol. The rebels caught on and turned 
them against the Capitol by sending them home 
loaded with lies. When this was discovered, the 
jabberjays were left to die. In a few years, they 
became extinct in the wild, but not before they had 
mated with female mockingbirds, creating an entirely 
new species. 

"But mockingjays were never a weapon," said Madge. 
"They're just songbirds. Right?" 



86 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Yeah, I guess so," I said. But it's not true. A 
mockingbird is just a songbird. A mockingjay is a 
creature the Capitol never intended to exist. They 
hadn't counted on the highly controlled jabberj ay 
having the brains to adapt to the wild, to pass on its 
genetic code, to thrive in a new form. They hadn't 
anticipated its will to live. 

Now, as I trudge through the snow, I see the 
mockingj ays hopping about on branches as they pick 
up on other birds' melodies, replicate them, and then 
transform them into something new. As always, they 
remind me of Rue. I think of the dream I had the last 
night on the train, where I followed her in mockingjay 
form. I wish I could have stayed asleep just a bit 
longer and found out where she was trying to take 
me. 

It's a hike to the lake, no question. If he decides to 
follow me at all, Gale's going to be put out by this 
excessive use of energy that could be better spent in 
hunting. He was conspicuously absent from the 
dinner at the mayor's house, although the rest of his 
family came. Hazelle said he was home sick, which 
was an obvious lie. I couldn't find him at the Harvest 
Festival, either. Vick told me he was out hunting. 
That was probably true. 

After a couple of hours, I reach an old house near the 
edge of the lake. Maybe "house" is too big a word for 
it. It's only one room, about twelve feet square. My 
father thought that a long time ago there were a lot of 
buildings — you can still see some of the foundations — 
and people came to them to play and fish in the lake. 
This house outlasted the others because it's made of 
concrete. Floor, roof, ceiling. Only one of four glass 
windows remains, wavy and yellowed by time. There's 
no plumbing and no electricity, but the fireplace still 
works and there's a woodpile in the corner that my 
87 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



father and I collected years ago. I start a small fire, 
counting on the mist to obscure any telltale smoke. 
While the fire catches, I sweep out the snow that has 
accumulated under the empty windows, using a twig 
broom my father made me when I was about eight 
and I played house here. Then I sit on the tiny 
concrete hearth, thawing out by the fire and waiting 
for Gale. 

It's a surprisingly short time before he appears. A bow 
slung over his shoulder, a dead wild turkey he must 
have encountered along the way hanging from his 
belt. He stands in the doorway as if considering 
whether or not to enter. He holds the unopened 
leather bag of food, the flask, Cinna's gloves. Gifts he 
will not accept because of his anger at me. I know 
exactly how he feels. Didn't I do the same thing to my 
mother? 

I look in his eyes. His temper can't quite mask the 
hurt, the sense of betrayal he feels at my engagement 
to Peeta. This will be my last chance, this meeting 
today, to not lose Gale forever. I could take hours 
trying to explain, and even then have him refuse me. 
Instead I go straight to the heart of my defense. 

"President Snow personally threatened to have you 
killed," I say. 

Gale raises his eyebrows slightly, but there's no real 
show of fear or astonishment. "Anyone else?" 

"Well, he didn't actually give me a copy of the list. But 
it's a good guess it includes both our families," I say. 

It's enough to bring him to the fire. He crouches 
before the hearth and warms himself. "Unless what?" 



88 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Unless nothing, now," I say. Obviously this requires 
more of an explanation, but I have no idea where to 
start, so I just sit there staring gloomily into the fire. 

After about a minute of this, Gale breaks the silence. 
"Well, thanks for the heads-up." 

I turn to him, ready to snap, but I catch the glint in 
his eye. I hate myself for smiling. This is not a funny 
moment, but I guess it's a lot to drop on someone. 
We're all going to be obliterated no matter what. "I do 
have a plan, you know." 

"Yeah, I bet it's a stunner," he says. He tosses the 
gloves on my lap. "Here. I don't want your fiance's old 
gloves." 

"He's not my fiance. That's just part of the act. And 
these aren't his gloves. They were Cinna's," I say. 

"Give them back, then," he says. He pulls on the 
gloves, flexes his fingers, and nods in approval. "At 
least I'll die in comfort." 

"That's optimistic. Of course, you don't know what's 
happened," I say. 

"Let's have it," he says. 

I decide to begin with the night Peeta and I were 
crowned victors of the Hunger Games, and Haymitch 
warned me of the Capitol's fury. I tell him about the 
uneasiness that dogged me even once I was back 
home, President Snow's visit to my house, the 
murders in District 1 1, the tension in the crowds, the 
last-ditch effort of the engagement, the president's 
indication that it hadn't been enough, my certainty 
that 111 have to pay. 



89 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Gale never interrupts. While I talk, he tucks the 
gloves in his pocket and occupies himself with 
turning the food in the leather bag into a meal for us. 
Toasting bread and cheese, coring apples, placing 
chestnuts in the fire to roast. I watch his hands, his 
beautiful, capable fingers. Scarred, as mine were 
before the Capitol erased all marks from my skin, but 
strong and deft. Hands that have the power to mine 
coal but the precision to set a delicate snare. Hands I 
trust. 

I pause to take a drink of tea from the flask before I 
tell him about my homecoming. 

"Well, you really made a mess of things," he says. "I'm 
not even done," I tell him. 

"I've heard enough for the moment. Let's skip ahead 
to this plan of yours," he says. 

I take a deep breath. "We run away." 

"What?" he asks. This has actually caught him off 
guard. 

"We take to the woods and make a run for it," I say. 
His face is impossible to read. Will he laugh at me, 
dismiss this as foolishness? I rise in agitation, 
preparing for an argument. "You said yourself you 
thought that we could do it! That morning of the 
reaping. You said — " 

He steps in and I feel myself lifted off the ground. The 
room spins, and I have to lock my arms around Gale's 
neck to brace myself. He's laughing, happy. 

"Hey!" I protest, but I'm laughing, too. 



90 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Gale sets me down but doesn't release his hold on 
me. "Okay, let's run away," he says. 

"Really? You don't think I'm mad? You 11 go with me?" 
Some of the crushing weight begins to lift as it 
transfers to Gale's shoulders. 

"I do think you're mad and 111 still go with you," he 
says. He means it. Not only means it but welcomes it. 
"We can do it. I know we can. Let's get out of here and 
never come back!" 

"You're sure?" I say. "Because it's going to be hard, 
with the kids and all. I don't want to get five miles 
into the woods and have you — " 

"I'm sure. I'm completely, entirely, one hundred 
percent sure." He tilts his forehead down to rest 
against mine and pulls me closer. His skin, his whole 
being, radiates heat from being so near the fire, and I 
close my eyes, soaking in his warmth. I breathe in the 
smell of snow-dampened leather and smoke and 
apples, the smell of all those wintry days we shared 
before the Games. I don't try to move away. Why 
should I, anyway? His voice drops to a whisper. "I love 
you." 

That's why. 

I never see these things coming. They happen too fast. 
One second you're proposing an escape plan and the 
next... you're expected to deal with something like 
this. I come up with what must be the worst possible 
response. "I know." 

It sounds terrible. Like I assume he couldn't help 
loving me but that I don't feel anything in return. 
Gale starts to draw away, but I grab hold of him. "I 
know! And you... you know what you are to me." It's 



91 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



not enough. He breaks my grip. "Gale, I can't think 
about anyone that way now. All I can think about, 
every day, every waking minute since they drew 
Prim's name at the reaping, is how afraid I am. And 
there doesn't seem to be room for anything else. If we 
could get somewhere safe, maybe I could be different. 
I don't know." 

I can see him swallowing his disappointment. "So, 
well go. We'll find out." He turns back to the fire, 
where the chestnuts are beginning to burn. He flips 
them out onto the hearth. "My mother's going to take 
some convincing." 

I guess he's still going, anyway. But the happiness 
has fled, leaving an all-too-familiar strain in its place. 
"Mine, too. Ill just have to make her see reason. Take 
her for a long walk. Make sure she understands we 
won't survive the alternative." 

"She'll understand. I watched a lot of the Games with 
her and Prim. She won't say no to you," says Gale. 

"I hope not." The temperature in the house seems to 
have dropped twenty degrees in a matter of seconds. 
"Haymitch will be the real challenge." 

"Haymitch?" Gale abandons the chestnuts. "You're 
not asking him to come with us?" 

"I have to, Gale. I can't leave him and Peeta because 
they'd—" His scowl cuts me off. "What?" 

"I'm sorry. I didn't realize how large our party was," 
he snaps at me. 

"They'd torture them to death, trying to find out 
where I was," I say. 



92 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"What about Peeta's family? They 11 never come. In 
fact, they probably couldn't wait to inform on us. 
Which I'm sure he's smart enough to realize. What if 
he decides to stay?" he asks. 

I try to sound indifferent, but my voice cracks. "Then 
he stays." 

"You'd leave him behind?" Gale asks. 

"To save Prim and my mother, yes," I answer. "I 
mean, no! Ill get him to come." 

"And me, would you leave me?" Gale's expression is 
rock hard now. "Just if, for instance, I can't convince 
my mother to drag three young kids into the 
wilderness in winter." 

"Hazelle won't refuse. She'll see sense," I say. 

"Suppose she doesn't, Katniss. What then?" he 
demands. 

"Then you have to force her, Gale. Do you think I'm 
making this stuff up?" My voice is rising in anger as 
well. 

"No. I don't know. Maybe the president's just 
manipulating you. I mean, he's throwing your 
wedding. You saw how the Capitol crowd reacted. I 
don't think he can afford to kill you. Or Peeta. How's 
he going to get out of that one?" says Gale. 

"Well, with an uprising in District Eight, I doubt he's 
spending much time choosing my wedding cake!" I 
shout. 

The instant the words are out of my mouth I want to 
reclaim them. Their effect on Gale is immediate — the 



93 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



flush on his cheeks, the brightness of his gray eyes. 
"There's an uprising in Eight?" he says in a hushed 
voice. 

I try to backpedal. To defuse him, as I tried to defuse 
the districts. "I don't know if it's really an uprising. 
There's unrest. People in the streets — " I say. 

Gale grabs my shoulders. "What did you see?" 

"Nothing! In person. I just heard something." As 
usual, it's too little, too late. I give up and tell him. "I 
saw something on the mayor's television. I wasn't 
supposed to. There was a crowd, and fires, and the 
Peacekeepers were gunning people down but they 
were fighting back..." I bite my lip and struggle to 
continue describing the scene. Instead I say aloud the 
words that have been eating me up inside. "And it's 
my fault, Gale. Because of what I did in the arena. If I 
had just killed myself with those berries, none of this 
would Ve happened. Peeta could have come home and 
lived, and everyone else would have been safe, too." 

"Safe to do what?" he says in a gentler tone. "Starve? 
Work like slaves? Send their kids to the reaping? You 
haven't hurt people — you've given them an 
opportunity. They just have to be brave enough to 
take it. There's already been talk in the mines. People 
who want to fight. Don't you see? It's happening! It's 
finally happening! If there's an uprising in District 
Eight, why not here? Why not everywhere? This could 
be it, the thing we've been — " 

"Stop it! You don't know what you're saying. The 
Peacekeepers outside of Twelve, they're not like 
Darius, or even Cray! The lives of district people — they 
mean less than nothing to them!" I say. 



94 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"That's why we have to join the fight!" he answers 
harshly. 



"No! We have to leave here before they kill us and a 
lot of other people, too!" I'm yelling again, but I can't 
understand why he's doing this. Why doesn't he see 
what's so undeniable? 

Gale pushes me roughly away from him. "You leave, 
then. I'd never go in a million years." 

"You were happy enough to go before. I don't see how 
an uprising in District Eight does anything but make 
it more important that we leave. You're just mad 
about — " No, I can't throw Peeta in his face. "What 
about your family?" 

"What about the other families, Katniss? The ones 
who can't run away? Don't you see? It can't be about 
just saving us anymore. Not if the rebellion's begun!" 
Gale shakes his head, not hiding his disgust with me. 
"You could do so much." He throws Cinna's gloves at 
my feet. "I changed my mind. I don't want anything 
they made in the Capitol." And he's gone. 

I look down at the gloves. Anything they made in the 
Capitol? Was that directed at me? Does he think I am 
now just another product of the Capitol and therefore 
something untouchable? The unfairness of it all fills 
me with rage. But it's mixed up with fear over what 
kind of crazy thing he might do next. 

I sink down next to the fire, desperate for comfort, to 
work out my next move. I calm myself by thinking 
that rebellions don't happen in a day. Gale can't talk 
to the miners until tomorrow. If I can get to Hazelle 
before then, she might straighten him out. But I can't 
go now. If he's there, hell lock me out. Maybe tonight, 
after everyone else is asleep... Hazelle often works late 



95 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



into the night finishing up laundry. I could go then, 
tap at the window, tell her the situation so she'll keep 
Gale from doing anything foolish. 

My conversation with President Snow in the study 
comes back to me. 

"My advisors were concerned you would be difficult, 
but you're not planning on being difficult at all, are 
you?" 

"No. " 

"That's what I told them. I said any girl who goes to 
such lengths to preserve her life isn't going to be 
interested in throwing it away with both hands. " 

I think of how hard Hazelle has worked to keep that 
family alive. Surely shell be on my side in this matter. 
Or won't she? 

It must be getting on toward noon now and the days 
are so short. No point in being in the woods after dark 
if you don't have to. I stamp out the remains of my 
little fire, clear up the scraps of food, and tuck 
Cinna's gloves in my belt. I guess I'll hang on to them 
for a while. In case Gale has a change of heart. I think 
of the look on his face when he flung them to the 
ground. How repelled he was by them, by me... 

I trudge through the woods and reach my old house 
while there's still light. My conversation with Gale was 
an obvious setback, but I'm still determined to carry 
on with my plan to escape District 12.1 decide to find 
Peeta next. In a strange way, since he's seen some of 
what I've seen on the tour, he may be an easier sell 
than Gale was. I run into him as he's leaving the 
Victor's Village. 



96 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Been hunting?" he asks. You can see he doesn't 
think it's a good idea. 

"Not really. Going to town?" I ask. 

"Yes. I'm supposed to eat dinner with my family," he 
says. 

"Well, I can at least walk you in." The road from the 
Victor's Village to the square gets little use. It's a safe 
enough place to talk. But I can't seem to get the 
words out. Proposing it to Gale was such a disaster. I 
gnaw on my chapped lips. The square gets closer with 
every step. I may not have an opportunity again soon. 
I take a deep breath and let the words rush out. 
"Peeta, if I asked you to run away from the district 
with me, would you?" 

Peeta takes my arm, bringing me to a stop. He doesn't 
need to check my face to see if I'm serious. "Depends 
on why you're asking." 

"President Snow wasn't convinced by me. There's an 
uprising in District Eight. We have to get out," I say. 

"By \ve' do you mean just you and me? No. Who else 
would be going?" he asks. 

"My family. Yours, if they want to come. Haymitch, 
maybe," I say. 

"What about Gale?" he says. 

"I don't know. He might have other plans," I say. 

Peeta shakes his head and gives me a rueful smile. "I 
bet he does. Sure, Katniss, I'll go." 

I feel a slight twinge of hope. "You will?" 



97 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Yeah. But I don't think for a minute you will," he 
says. 

I jerk my arm away. "Then you don't know me. Be 
ready. It could be any time." I take off walking and he 
follows a pace or two behind. 

"Katniss," Peeta says. I don't slow down. If he thinks 
it's a bad idea, I don't want to know, because it's the 
only one I have. "Katniss, hold up." I kick a dirty, 
frozen chunk of snow off the path and let him catch 
up. The coal dust makes everything look especially 
ugly. "I really will go, if you want me to. I just think 
we better talk it through with Haymitch. Make sure 
we won't be making things worse for everyone." He 
raises his head. "What's that?" 

I lift my chin. I've been so consumed with my own 
worries, I haven't noticed the strange noise coming 
from the square. A whistling, the sound of an impact, 
the intake of breath from a crowd. 

"Come on," Peeta says, his face suddenly hard. I don't 
know why. I can't place the sound, even guess at the 
situation. But it means something bad to him. 

When we reach the square, it's clear something's 
happening, but the crowd's too thick to see. Peeta 
steps up on a crate against the wall of the sweetshop 
and offers me a hand while he scans the square. I'm 
halfway up when he suddenly blocks my way. "Get 
down. Get out of here!" He's whispering, but his voice 
is harsh with insistence. 

"What?" I say, trying to force my way back up. 

"Go home, Katniss! Ill be there in a minute, I swear!" 
he says. 



98 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Whatever it is, it's terrible. I yank away from his hand 
and begin to push my way through the crowd. People 
see me, recognize my face, and then look panicked. 
Hands shove me back. Voices hiss. 

"Get out of here, girl." 

"Only make it worse." 

"What do you want to do? Get him killed?" 

But at this point, my heart is beating so fast and 
fierce I hardly hear them. I only know that whatever 
waits in the middle of the square is meant for me. 
When I finally break through to the cleared space, I 
see I am right. And Peeta was right. And those voices 
were right, too. 

Gale's wrists are bound to a wooden post. The wild 
turkey he shot earlier hangs above him, the nail 
driven through its neck. His jacket's been cast aside 
on the ground, his shirt torn away. He slumps 
unconscious on his knees, held up only by the ropes 
at his wrists. What used to be his back is a raw, 
bloody slab of meat. 

Standing behind him is a man I've never seen, but I 
recognize his uniform. It's the one designated for our 
Head Peacekeeper. This isn't old Cray, though. This is 
a tall, muscular man with sharp creases in his pants. 

The pieces of the picture do not quite come together 
until I see his arm raise the whip. 



99 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



3 



"No!" I cry, and spring forward. It's too late to stop the 
arm from descending, and I instinctively know I won't 
have the power to block it. Instead I throw myself 
directly between the whip and Gale. I've flung out my 
arms to protect as much of his broken body as 
possible, so there's nothing to deflect the lash. I take 
the full force of it across the left side of my face. 

The pain is blinding and instantaneous. Jagged 
flashes of light cross my vision and I fall to my knees. 
One hand cups my cheek while the other keeps me 
from tipping over. I can already feel the welt rising up, 
the swelling closing my eye. The stones beneath me 
are wet with Gale's blood, the air heavy with its scent. 
"Stop it! Youll kill him!" I shriek. 

I get a glimpse of my assailant's face. Hard, with deep 
lines, a cruel mouth. Gray hair shaved almost to 
nonexistence, eyes so black they seem all pupils, a 
long, straight nose reddened by the freezing air. The 
powerful arm lifts again, his sights set on me. My 
hand flies to my shoulder, hungry for an arrow, but, 
of course, my weapons are stashed in the woods. I 
grit my teeth in anticipation of the next lash. 

"Hold it!" a voice barks. Haymitch appears and trips 
over a Peacekeeper lying on the ground. It's Darius. A 
huge purple lump pushes through the red hair on his 
forehead. He's knocked out but still breathing. What 
happened? Did he try to come to Gale's aid before I 
got here? 

Haymitch ignores him and pulls me to my feet 
roughly. "Oh, excellent." His hand locks under my 
chin, lifting it. "She's got a photo shoot next week 
100 I P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



modeling wedding dresses. What am I supposed to tell 
her stylist?" 

I see a flicker of recognition in the eyes of the man 
with the whip. Bundled against the cold, my face free 
of makeup, my braid tucked carelessly under my 
coat, it wouldn't be easy to identify me as the victor of 
the last Hunger Games. Especially with half my face 
swelling up. But Haymitch has been showing up on 
television for years, and he'd be difficult to forget. 

The man rests the whip on his hip. "She interrupted 
the punishment of a confessed criminal." 

Everything about this man, his commanding voice, 
his odd accent, warns of an unknown and dangerous 
threat. Where has he come from? District 1 1? 3? 
From the Capitol itself? 

"I don't care if she blew up the blasted Justice 
Building! Look at her cheek! Think that will be 
camera ready in a week?" Haymitch snarls. 

The man's voice is still cold, but I can detect a slight 
edge of doubt. "That's not my problem." 

"No? Well, it's about to be, my friend. The first call I 
make when I get home is to the Capitol," says 
Haymitch. 

"Find out who authorized you to mess up my victor's 
pretty little face!" 

"He was poaching. What business is it of hers, 
anyway?" says the man. 

"He's her cousin." Peeta's got my other arm now, but 
gently. "And she's my fiance. So if you want to get to 
him, expect to go through both of us." 



101 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Maybe we're it. The only three people in the district 
who could make a stand like this. Although it's sure 
to be temporary. There will be repercussions. But at 
the moment, all I care about is keeping Gale alive. 
The new Head Peacekeeper glances over at his 
backup squad. With relief, I see they're familiar faces, 
old friends from the Hob. You can tell by their 
expressions that they're not enjoying the show. 

One, a woman named Purnia who eats regularly at 
Greasy Sae's, steps forward stiffly. "I believe, for a 
first offense, the required number of lashes has been 
dispensed, sir. Unless your sentence is death, which 
we would carry out by firing squad." 

"Is that the standard protocol here?" asks the Head 
Peacekeeper. 

"Yes, sir," Purnia says, and several others nod in 
agreement. I'm sure none of them actually know 
because, in the Hob, the standard protocol for 
someone showing up with a wild turkey is for 
everybody to bid on the drumsticks. 

"Very well. Get your cousin out of here, then, girl. And 
if he comes to, remind him that the next time he 
poaches off the Capitol's land, I'll assemble that firing 
squad personally." The Head Peacekeeper wipes his 
hand along the length of the whip, splattering us with 
blood. Then he coils it into quick, neat loops and 
walks off. 

Most of the other Peacekeepers fall in an awkward 
formation behind him. A small group stays behind 
and hoists Darius 's body up by the arms and legs. I 
catch Purnia's eye and mouth the word "Thanks" 
before she goes. She doesn't respond, but I'm sure 
she understood. 



102 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Gale." I turn, my hands fumbling at the knots 
binding his wrists. Someone passes forward a knife 
and Peeta cuts the ropes. Gale collapses to the 
ground. 

"Better get him to your mother," says Haymitch. 

There's no stretcher, but the old woman at the 
clothing stall sells us the board that serves as her 
countertop. "Just don't tell where you got it," she 
says, packing up the rest of her goods quickly. Most 
of the square has emptied, fear getting the better of 
compassion. But after what just happened, I can't 
blame anyone. 

By the time we've laid Gale facedown on the board, 
there's only a handful of people left to carry him. 
Haymitch, Peeta, and a couple of miners who work on 
the same crew as Gale lift him up. 

Leevy, a girl who lives a few houses down from mine 
in the Seam, takes my arm. My mother kept her little 
brother alive last year when he caught the measles. 
"Need help getting back?" Her gray eyes are scared 
but determined. 

"No, but can you get Hazelle? Send her over?" I ask. 

"Yeah," says Leevy, turning on her heel. 

"Leevy!" I say. "Don't let her bring the kids." "No. I'll 
stay with them myself," she says. "Thanks." I grab 
Gale's jacket and hurry after the others. 

"Get some snow on that," Haymitch orders over his 
shoulder. I scoop up a handful of snow and press it 
against my cheek, numbing a bit of the pain. My left 
eye's tearing heavily now, and in the dimming light 
it's all I can do to follow the boots in front of me. 



103 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



As we walk I hear Bristel and Thorn, Gale's 
crewmates, piece together the story of what 
happened. Gale must've gone to Cray's house, as he's 
done a hundred times, knowing Cray always pays well 
for a wild turkey. Instead he found the new Head 
Peacekeeper, a man they heard someone call 
Romulus Thread. No one knows what happened to 
Cray. He was buying white liquor in the Hob just this 
morning, apparently still in command of the district, 
but now he's nowhere to be found. Thread put Gale 
under immediate arrest and, of course, since he was 
standing there holding a dead turkey, there was little 
Gale could say in his own defense. Word of his 
predicament spread quickly. He was brought to the 
square, forced to plead guilty to his crime, and 
sentenced to a whipping to be carried out 
immediately. By the time I showed up, he'd been 
lashed at least forty times. He passed out around 
thirty. 

"Lucky he only had the turkey on him," says Bristel. 
"If he'd had his usual haul, would've been much 
worse." 

"He told Thread he found it wandering around the 
Seam. Said it got over the fence and he'd stabbed it 
with a stick. Still a crime. But if they'd known he'd 
been in the woods with weapons, they'd have killed 
him for sure," says Thorn. 

"What about Darius?" Peeta asks. 

"After about twenty lashes, he stepped in, saying that 
was enough. Only he didn't do it smart and official, 
like Purnia did. He grabbed Thread's arm and Thread 
hit him in the head with the butt of the whip. Nothing 
good waiting for him," says Bristel. 



104 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Doesn't sound like much good for any of us," says 
Haymitch. 

Snow begins, thick and wet, making visibility even 
more difficult. I stumble up the walk to my house 
behind the others, using my ears more than my eyes 
to guide me. A golden light colors the snow as the 
door opens. My mother, who was no doubt waiting for 
me after a long day of unexplained absence, takes in 
the scene. 

"New Head," Haymitch says, and she gives him a curt 
nod as if no other explanation is needed. 

I'm filled with awe, as I always am, as I watch her 
transform from a woman who calls me to kill a spider 
to a woman immune to fear. When a sick or dying 
person is brought to her. . . this is the only time I think 
my mother knows who she is. In moments, the long 
kitchen table has been cleared, a sterile white cloth 
spread across it, and Gale hoisted onto it. My mother 
pours water from a kettle into a basin while ordering 
Prim to pull a series of her remedies from the 
medicine cabinet. Dried herbs and tinctures and 
store-bought bottles. I watch her hands, the long, 
tapered fingers crumbling this, adding drops of that, 
into the basin. Soaking a cloth in the hot liquid as 
she gives Prim instructions to prepare a second brew. 

My mother glances my way. "Did it cut your eye?" 

"No, it's just swelled shut," I say. 

"Get more snow on it," she instructs. But I am clearly 
not a priority. 

"Can you save him?" I ask my mother. She says 
nothing as she wrings out the cloth and holds it in 
the air to cool somewhat. 



105 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Don't worry," says Haymitch. "Used to be a lot of 
whipping before Cray. She's the one we took them to." 



I can't remember a time before Cray, a time when 
there was a Head Peacekeeper who used the whip 
freely. But my mother must have been around my age 
and still working at the apothecary shop with her 
parents. Even back then, she must have had healer's 
hands. 

Ever so gently, she begins to clean the mutilated flesh 
on Gale's back. I feel sick to my stomach, useless, the 
remaining snow dripping from my glove into a puddle 
on the floor. Peeta puts me in a chair and holds a 
cloth filled with fresh snow to my cheek. 

Haymitch tells Bristel and Thorn to get home, and I 
see him press coins into their hands before they 
leave. "Don't know what will happen with your crew," 
he says. They nod and accept the money. 

Hazelle arrives, breathless and flushed, fresh snow in 
her hair. Wordlessly, she sits on a stool next to the 
table, takes Gale's hand, and holds it against her lips. 
My mother doesn't acknowledge even her. She's gone 
into that special zone that includes only herself and 
the patient and occasionally Prim. The rest of us can 
wait. 

Even in her expert hands, it takes a long time to clean 
the wounds, arrange what shredded skin can be 
saved, apply a salve and a light bandage. As the blood 
clears, I can see where every stroke of the lash landed 
and feel it resonate in the single cut on my face. I 
multiply my own pain once, twice, forty times and can 
only hope that Gale remains unconscious. Of course, 
that's too much to ask for. As the final bandages are 
being placed, a moan escapes his lips. Hazelle strokes 
his hair and whispers something while my mother 



106 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



and Prim go through their meager store of painkillers, 
the kind usually accessible only to doctors. They are 
hard to come by, expensive, and always in demand. 
My mother has to save the strongest for the worst 
pain, but what is the worst pain? To me, it's always 
the pain that is present. If I were in charge, those 
painkillers would be gone in a day because I have so 
little ability to watch suffering. My mother tries to 
save them for those who are actually in the process of 
dying, to ease them out of the world. 

Since Gale is regaining consciousness, they decide on 
an herbal concoction he can take by mouth. "That 
won't be enough," I say. They stare at me. "That won't 
be enough, I know how it feels. That will barely knock 
out a headache." 

"Well combine it with sleep syrup, Katniss, and he'll 
manage it. The herbs are more for the inflammation — 
" my mother begins calmly. 

"Just give him the medicine!" I scream at her. "Give it 
to him! Who are you, anyway, to decide how much 
pain he can stand!" 

Gale begins stirring at my voice, trying to reach me. 
The movement causes fresh blood to stain his 
bandages and an agonized sound to come from his 
mouth. 

"Take her out," says my mother. Haymitch and Peeta 
literally carry me from the room while I shout 
obscenities at her. They pin me down on a bed in one 
of the extra bedrooms until I stop fighting. 

While I lie there, sobbing, tears trying to squeeze out 
of the slit of my eye, I hear Peeta whisper to Haymitch 
about President Snow, about the uprising in District 



107 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



8. "She wants us all to run," he says, but if Haymitch 
has an opinion on this, he doesn't offer it. 

After a while, my mother comes in and treats my face. 
Then she holds my hand, stroking my arm, while 
Haymitch fills her in on what happened with Gale. 

"So it's starting again?" she says. "Like before?" 

"By the looks of it," he answers. "Who'd have thought 
we'd ever be sorry to see old Cray go?" 

Cray would have been disliked, anyway, because of 
the uniform he wore, but it was his habit of luring 
starving young women into his bed for money that 
made him an object of loathing in the district. In 
really bad times, the hungriest would gather at his 
door at nightfall, vying for the chance to earn a few 
coins to feed their families by selling their bodies. Had 
I been older when my father died, I might have been 
among them. Instead I learned to hunt. 

I don't know exactly what my mother means by things 
starting again, but I'm too angry and hurting to ask. 
It's registered, though, the idea of worse times 
returning, because when the doorbell rings, I shoot 
straight out of bed. Who could it be at this hour of the 
night? There's only one answer. Peacekeepers. 

"They can't have him," I say. 

"Might be you they're after," Haymitch reminds me. 
"Or you," I say. 

"Not my house," Haymitch points out. "But I'll get the 
door." 

"No, 111 get it," says my mother quietly. 



108 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



We all go, though, following her down the hallway to 
the insistent ring of the bell. When she opens it, 
there's not a squad of Peacekeepers but a single, 
snow-caked figure. Madge. She holds out a small, 
damp cardboard box to me. 

"Use these for your friend," she says. I take off the lid 
of the box, revealing half a dozen vials of clear liquid. 
"They're my mother's. She said I could take them. Use 
them, please." She runs back into the storm before we 
can stop her. 

"Crazy girl," Haymitch mutters as we follow, my 
mother into the kitchen. 

Whatever my mother had given Gale, I was right, it 
isn't enough. His teeth are gritted and his flesh shines 
with sweat. My mother fills a syringe with the clear 
liquid from one of the vials and shoots it into his arm. 
Almost immediately, his face begins to relax. 

"What is that stuff?" asks Peeta. 

"It's from the Capitol. It's called morphling," my 
mother answers. 

"I didn't even know Madge knew Gale," says Peeta. 

"We used to sell her strawberries," I say almost 
angrily. What am I angry about, though? Not that she 
has brought the medicine, surely. 

"She must have quite a taste for them," says 
Haymitch. 

That's what nettles me. It's the implication that 
there's something going on between Gale and Madge. 
And I don't like it. 



109 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"She's my friend" is all I say. 



Now that Gale has drifted away on the painkiller, 
everyone seems to deflate. Prim makes us each eat 
some stew and bread. A room is offered to Hazelle, 
but she has to go home to the other kids. Haymitch 
and Peeta are both willing to stay, but my mother 
sends them home to bed as well. She knows it's 
pointless to try this with me and leaves me to tend 
Gale while she and Prim rest. 

Alone in the kitchen with Gale, I sit on Hazelle's stool, 
holding his hand. After a while, my fingers find his 
face. I touch parts of him I have never had cause to 
touch before. His heavy, dark eyebrows, the curve of 
his cheek, the line of his nose, the hollow at the base 
of his neck. I trace the outline of stubble on his jaw 
and finally work my way to his lips. Soft and full, 
slightly chapped. His breath warms my chilled skin. 

Does everyone look younger asleep? Because right 
now he could be the boy I ran into in the woods years 
ago, the one who accused me of stealing from his 
traps. What a pair we were — fatherless, frightened, 
but fiercely committed, too, to keeping our families 
alive. Desperate, yet no longer alone after that day, 
because we'd found each other. I think of a hundred 
moments in the woods, lazy afternoons fishing, the 
day I taught him to swim, that time I twisted my knee 
and he carried me home. Mutually counting on each 
other, watching each other's backs, forcing each other 
to be brave. 

For the first time, I reverse our positions in my head. I 
imagine watching Gale volunteering to save Rory in 
the reaping, having him torn from my life, becoming 
some strange girl's lover to stay alive, and then 
coming home with her. Living next to her. Promising 
to marry her. 



110 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



The hatred I feel for him, for the phantom girl, for 
everything, is so real and immediate that it chokes 
me. Gale is mine. I am his. Anything else is 
unthinkable. Why did it take him being whipped 
within an inch of his life to see it? 

Because I'm selfish. I'm a coward. I'm the kind of girl 
who, when she might actually be of use, would run to 
stay alive and leave those who couldn't follow to suffer 
and die. This is the girl Gale met in the woods today. 

No wonder I won the Games. No decent person ever 
does. 

You saved Peeta, I think weakly. 

But now I question even that. I knew good and well 
that my life back in District 12 would be unlivable if I 
let that boy die. 

I rest my head forward on the edge of the table, 
overcome with loathing for myself. Wishing I had died 
in the arena. Wishing Seneca Crane had blown me to 
bits the way President Snow said he should have 
when I held out the berries. 

The berries. I realize the answer to who I am lies in 
that handful of poisonous fruit. If I held them out to 
save Peeta because I knew I would be shunned if I 
came back without him, then I am despicable. If I 
held them out because I loved him, I am still self- 
centered, although forgivable. But if I held them out 
to defy the Capitol, I am someone of worth. The 
trouble is, I don't know exactly what was going on 
inside me at that moment. 

Could it be the people in the districts are right? That 
it was an act of rebellion, even if it was an 
unconscious one? Because, deep down, I must know 



111 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



it isn't enough to keep myself, or my family, or my 
friends alive by running away. Even if I could. It 
wouldn't fix anything. It wouldn't stop people from 
being hurt the way Gale was today. 

Life in District 12 isn't really so different from life in 
the arena. At some point, you have to stop running 
and turn around and face whoever wants you dead. 
The hard thing is finding the courage to do it. Well, 
it's not hard for Gale. He was born a rebel. I'm the 
one making an escape plan. 

"I'm so sorry," I whisper. I lean forward and kiss him. 

His eyelashes flutter and he looks at me through a 
haze of opiates. "Hey, Catnip." 

"Hey, Gale," I say. 

"Thought you'd be gone by now," he says. 

My choices are simple. I can die like quarry in the 
woods or I can die here beside Gale. "I'm not going 
anywhere. I'm going to stay right here and cause all 
kinds of trouble." 

"Me, too," Gale says. He just manages a smile before 
the drugs pull him back under. 



112 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Someone gives my shoulder a shake and I sit up. I've 
fallen asleep with my face on the table. The white 
cloth has left creases on my good cheek. The other, 
the one that took the lash from Thread, throbs 
painfully. Gale's dead to the world, but his fingers are 
locked around mine. I smell fresh bread and turn my 
stiff neck to find Peeta looking down at me with such 
a sad expression. I get the sense that he's been 
watching us awhile. 

"Go on up to bed, Katniss. Ill look after him now," he 
says. 

"Peeta. About what I said yesterday, about running — " 
I begin. 

"I know," he says. "There's nothing to explain." 

I see the loaves of bread on the counter in the pale, 
snowy morning light. The blue shadows under his 
eyes. I wonder if he slept at all. Couldn't have been 
long. I think of his agreeing to go with me yesterday, 
his stepping up beside me to protect Gale, his 
willingness to throw his lot in with mine entirely when 
I give him so little in return. No matter what I do, I'm 
hurting someone. "Peeta — " 

"Just go to bed, okay?" he says. 

I feel my way up the stairs, crawl under the covers, 
and fall asleep at once. At some point, Clove, the girl 
from District 2, enters my dreams. She chases me, 
pins me to the ground, and pulls out a knife to cut 
my face. It digs deeply into my cheek, opening a wide 
gash. Then Clove begins to transform, her face 
113 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



elongating into a snout, dark fur sprouting from her 
skin, her fingernails growing into long claws, but her 
eyes remain unchanged. She becomes the mutta-tion 
form of herself, the wolflike creation of the Capitol 
that terrorized us the last night in the arena. Tossing 
back her head, she lets out a long, eerie howl that is 
picked up by other mutts nearby. Clove begins to lap 
the blood flowing from my wound, each lick sending a 
new wave of pain through my face. I give a strangled 
cry and wake with a start, sweating and shivering at 
once. Cradling my damaged cheek in my hand, I 
remind myself that it was not Clove but Thread who 
gave me this wound. I wish that Peeta were here to 
hold me, until I remember I'm not supposed to wish, 
that anymore. I have chosen Gale and the rebellion, 
and a future with Peeta is the Capitol's design, not 
mine. 

The swelling around my eye has gone down and I can 
open it a bit. I push aside the curtains and see the 
snowstorm has strengthened to a full-out blizzard. 
There's nothing but whiteness and the howling wind 
that sounds remarkably like the muttations. 

I welcome the blizzard, with its ferocious winds and 
deep, drifting snow. This may be enough to keep the 
real wolves, also known as the Peacekeepers, from my 
door. A few days to think. To work out a plan. With 
Gale and Peeta and Haymitch all at hand. This 
blizzard is a gift. 

Before I go down to face this new life, though, I take 
some time making myself acknowledge what it will 
mean. Less than a day ago, I was prepared to head 
into the wilderness with my loved ones in midwinter, 
with the very real possibility of the Capitol pursuing 
us. A precarious venture at best. But now I am 
committing to something even more risky. Fighting 
the Capitol assures their swift retaliation. I must 
114 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



accept that at any moment I can be arrested. There 
will be a knock on the door, like the one last night, a 
band of Peacekeepers to haul me away. There might 
be torture. Mutilation. A bullet through my skull in 
the town square, if I'm fortunate enough to go that 
quickly. The Capitol has no end of creative ways to 
kill people. I imagine these things and I'm terrified, 
but let's face it: They've been lurking in the back of 
my brain, anyway. I've been a tribute in the Games. 
Been threatened by the president. Taken a lash 
across my face. I'm already a target. 

Now comes the harder part. I have to face the fact 
that my family and friends might share this fate. 
Prim. I need only to think of Prim and all my resolve 
disintegrates. It's my job to protect her. I pull the 
blanket up over my head, and my breathing is so 
rapid I use up all the oxygen and begin to choke for 
air. I can't let the Capitol hurt Prim. 

And then it hits me. They already have. They have 
killed her father in those wretched mines. They have 
sat by as she almost starved to death. They have 
chosen her as a tribute, then made her watch her 
sister fight to the death in the Games. She has been 
hurt far worse than I had at the age of twelve. And 
even that pales in comparison with Rue's life. 

I shove off the blanket and suck in the cold air that 
seeps through the windowpanes. 

Prim... Rue... aren't they the very reason I have to try 
to fight? Because what has been done to them is so 
wrong, so beyond justification, so evil that there is no 
choice? Because no one has the right to treat them as 
they have been treated? 

Yes. This is the thing to remember when fear 
threatens to swallow me up. What I am about to do, 



115 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



whatever any of us are forced to endure, it is for 
them. It's too late to help Rue, but maybe not too late 
for those five little faces that looked up at me from the 
square in District 1 1 . Not too late for Rory and Vick 
and Posy. Not too late for Prim. 

Gale is right. If people have the courage, this could be 
an opportunity. He's also right that, since I have set it 
in motion, I could do so much. Although I have no 
idea what exactly that should be. But deciding not to 
run away is a crucial first step. 

I take a shower, and this morning my brain is not 
assembling lists of supplies for the wild, but trying to 
figure out how they organized that uprising in District 
8. So many, so clearly acting in defiance of the 
Capitol. Was it even planned, or something that 
simply erupted out of years of hatred and 
resentment? How could we do that here? Would the 
people of District 12 join in or lock their doors? 
Yesterday the square emptied so quickly after Gale's 
whipping. But isn't that because we all feel so 
impotent and have no idea what to do? We need 
someone to direct us and reassure us this is possible. 
And I don't think I'm that person. I may have been a 
catalyst for rebellion, but a leader should be someone 
with conviction, and I'm barely a convert myself. 
Someone with unflinching courage, and I'm still 
working hard at even finding mine. Someone with 
clear and persuasive words, and I'm so easily tongue- 
tied. 

Words. I think of words and I think of Peeta. How 
people embrace everything he says. He could move a 
crowd to action, I bet, if he chose to. Would find the 
things to say. But I'm sure the idea has never crossed 
his mind. 



116 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Downstairs, I find my mother and Prim tending to a 
subdued Gale. The medicine must be wearing off, by 
the look on his face. I brace myself for another fight 
but try to keep my voice calm. "Can't you give him 
another shot?" 

"I will, if it's needed. We thought we'd try the snow 
coat first," says my mother. She has removed his 
bandages. You can practically see the heat radiating 
off his back. She lays a clean cloth across his angry- 
flesh and nods to Prim. 

Prim comes over, stirring what appears to be a large 
bowl of snow. But it's tinted a light green and gives off 
a sweet, clean scent. Snow coat. She carefully begins 
to ladle the stuff onto the cloth. I can almost hear the 
sizzle of Gale's tormented skin meeting the snow 
mixture. His eyes flutter open, perplexed, and then he 
lets out a sound of relief. 

"It's lucky we have snow," says my mother. 

I think of what it must be like to recover from a 
whipping in midsummer, with the searing heat and 
the tepid water from the tap. "What did you do in 
warm months?" I ask. 

A crease appears between my mother's eyebrows as 
she frowns. "Tried to keep the flies away." 

My stomach turns at the thought. She fills a 
handkerchief with the snow-coat mixture and I hold it 
to the weal on my cheek. Instantly the pain 
withdraws. It's the coldness of the snow, yes, but 
whatever mix of herbal juices my mother has added 
numbs as well. "Oh. That's wonderful. Why didn't you 
put this on him last night?" 

"I needed the wound to set first," she says. 

117 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I don't know what that means exactly, but as long as 
it works, who am I to question her? She knows what 
she's doing, my mother. I feel a pang of remorse about 
yesterday, the awful things I yelled at her as Peeta 
and Haymitch dragged me from the kitchen. "I'm 
sorry. About screaming at you yesterday." 

"I've heard worse," she says. "You've seen how people 
are, when someone they love is in pain." 

Someone they love. The words numb my tongue as if 
it's been packed in snow coat. Of course, I love Gale. 
But what kind of love does she mean? What do / 
mean when I say I love Gale? I don't know. I did kiss 
him last night, in a moment when my emotions were 
running so high. But I'm sure he doesn't remember it. 
Does he? I hope not. If he does, everything will just 
get more complicated and I really can't think about 
kissing when I've got a rebellion to incite. I give my 
head a little shake to clear it. "Where's Peeta?" I say. 

"He went home when we heard you stirring. Didn't 
want to leave his house unattended during the 
storm," says my mother. 

"Did he get back all right?" I ask. In a blizzard, you 
can get lost in a matter of yards and wander off 
course into oblivion. 

"Why don't you give him a call and check?" she says. 

I go into the study, a room I've pretty much avoided 
since my meeting with President Snow, and dial 
Peeta's number. After a few rings he answers. 

"Hey. I just wanted to make sure you got home," I 
say. 

"Katniss, I live three houses away from you," he says. 
118 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"I know, but with the weather and all," I say. 

"Well, I'm fine. Thank you for checking." There's a 
long pause. "How's Gale?" 

"All right. My mother and Prim are giving him snow 
coat now," I say. 

"And your face?" he asks. 

"I've got some, too," I say. "Have you seen Haymitch 
today?" 

"I checked in on him. Dead drunk. But I built up his 
fire and left him some bread," he says. 

"I wanted to talk to — to both of you." I don't dare add 
more, here on my phone, which is surely tapped. 

"Probably have to wait until after the weather calms 
down," he says. "Nothing much will happen before 
that, anyway." 

"No, nothing much," I agree. 

It takes two days for the storm to blow itself out, 
leaving us with drifts higher than my head. Another 
day before the path is cleared from the Victor's Village 
to the square. During this time I help tend to Gale, 
apply snow coat to my cheek, try to remember 
everything I can about the uprising in District 8, in 
case it will help us. The swelling in my face goes 
down, leaving me with an itchy, healing wound and a 
very black eye. But still, the first chance I get, I call 
Peeta to see if he wants to go into town with me. 

We rouse Haymitch and drag him along with us. He 
complains, but not as much as usual. We all know we 
need to discuss what happened and it can't be 



119 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



anywhere as dangerous as our homes in the Victor's 
Village. In fact, we wait until the village is well behind 
us to even speak. I spend the time studying the ten- 
foot walls of snow piled up on either side of the 
narrow path that has been cleared, wondering if they 
will collapse in on us. 

Finally Haymitch breaks the silence. "So we're all 
heading off into the great unknown, are we?" he asks 
me. 

"No," I say. "Not anymore." 

"Worked through the flaws in that plan, did you, 
sweetheart?" he asks. "Any new ideas?" 

"I want to start an uprising," I say. 

Haymitch just laughs. It's not even a mean laugh, 
which is more troubling. It shows he can't even take 
me seriously. "Well, I want a drink. You let me know 
how that works out for you, though," he says. 

"Then what's your plan?" I spit back at him. 

"My plan is to make sure everything is just perfect for 
your wedding," says Haymitch. "I called and 
rescheduled the photo shoot without giving too many 
details." 

"You don't even have a phone," I say. 

"Effie had that fixed," he says. "Do you know she 
asked me if I'd like to give you away? I told her the 
sooner the better." 

"Haymitch." I can hear the pleading creeping into my 
voice. 



120 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Katniss." He mimics my tone. "It won't work." 

We shut up as a team of men with shovels passes us, 
headed out to the Victor's Village. Maybe they can do 
something about those ten-foot walls. And by the time 
they're out of earshot, the square is too close. We step 
into it and all come to a stop simultaneously. 

Nothing much will happen during the blizzard. That's 
what Peeta and I had agreed. But we couldn't have 
been more wrong. The square has been transformed. 
A huge banner with the seal of Panem hangs off the 
roof of the Justice Building. Peacekeepers, in pristine 
white uniforms, march on the cleanly swept 
cobblestones. Along the rooftops, more of them 
occupy nests of machine guns. Most unnerving is a 
line of new constructions — an official whipping post, 
several stockades, and a gallows — set up in the center 
of the square. 

"Thread's a quick worker," says Haymitch. 

Some streets away from the square, I see a blaze flare 
up. None of us has to say it. That can only be the Hob 
going up in smoke. I think of Greasy Sae, Ripper, all 
my friends who make their living there. 

"Haymitch, you don't think everyone was still in — " I 
can't finish the sentence. 

"Nah, they're smarter than that. You'd be, too, if you'd 
been around longer," he says. "Well, I better go see 
how much rubbing alcohol the apothecary can spare." 

He trudges off across the square and I look at Peeta. 
"What's he want that for?" Then I realize the answer. 
"We can't let him drink it. He'll kill himself, or at the 
very least go blind. I've got some white liquor put 
away at home." 



121 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Me, too. Maybe that will hold him until Ripper finds 
a way to be back in business," says Peeta. "I need to 
check on my family." 

"I have to go see Hazelle." I'm worried now. I thought 
she'd be on our doorstep the moment the snow was 
cleared. But there's been no sign of her. 

"I'll go, too. Drop by the bakery on my way home," he 
says. 

"Thanks." I'm suddenly very scared at what I might 
find. 

The streets are almost deserted, which would not be 
so unusual at this time of day if people were at the 
mines, kids at school. But they're not. I see faces 
peeking at us out of doorways, through cracks in 
shutters. 

An uprising, I think. What an idiot I am. There's an 
inherent flaw in the plan that both Gale and I were 
too blind to see. An uprising requires breaking the 
law, thwarting authority. We've done that our whole 
lives, or our families have. Poaching, trading on the 
black market, mocking the Capitol in the woods. But 
for most people in District 12, a trip to buy something 
at the Hob would be too risky. And I expect them to 
assemble in the square with bricks and torches? Even 
the sight of Peeta and me is enough to make people 
pull their children away from the windows and draw 
the curtains tightly. 

We find Hazelle in her house, nursing a very sick 
Posy. I recognize the measles spots. "I couldn't leave 
her," she says. "I knew Gale'd be in the best possible 
hands." 



122 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Of course," I say. "He's much better. My mother says 
hell be back in the mines in a couple of weeks." 

"May not be open until then, anyway," says Hazelle. 
"Word is they're closed until further notice." She gives 
a nervous glance at her empty washtub. 

"You closed down, too?" I ask. 

"Not officially," says Hazelle. "But everyone's afraid to 
use me now." 

"Maybe it's the snow," says Peeta. 

"No, Rory made a quick round this morning. Nothing 
to wash, apparently," she says. 

Rory wraps his arms around Hazelle. "We'll be all 
right." 

I take a handful of money from my pocket and lay it 
on the table. "My mother will send something for 
Posy." 

When we're outside, I turn to Peeta. "You go on back. 
I want to walk by the Hob." 

"I'll go with you," he says. 

"No. I've dragged you into enough trouble," I tell him. 

"And avoiding a stroll by the Hob... that's going to fix 
things for me?" He smiles and takes my hand. 
Together we wind through the streets of the Seam 
until we reach the burning building. They haven't 
even bothered to leave Peacekeepers around it. They 
know no one would try to save it. 



123 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



The heat from the flames melts the surrounding snow 
and a black trickle runs across my shoes. "It's all that 
coal dust, from the old days," I say. It was in every 
crack and crevice. Ground into the floorboards. It's 
amazing the place didn't go up before. "I want to 
check on Greasy Sae." 

"Not today, Katniss. I don't think we'd be helping 
anyone by dropping in on them," he says. 

We go back to the square. I buy some cakes from 
Peeta's father while they exchange small talk about 
the weather. No one mentions the ugly tools of torture 
just yards from the front door. The last thing I notice 
as we leave the square is that I do not recognize even 
one of the Peacekeepers' faces. 

As the days pass, things go from bad to worse. The 
mines stay shut for two weeks, and by that time half 
of District 12 is starving. The number of kids signing 
up for tesserae soars, but they often don't receive 
their grain. Food shortages begin, and even those 
with money come away from stores empty-handed. 
When the mines reopen, wages are cut, hours 
extended, miners sent into blatantly dangerous work 
sites. The eagerly awaited food promised for Parcel 
Day arrives spoiled and defiled by rodents. The 
installations in the square see plenty of action as 
people are dragged in and punished for offenses so 
long overlooked we've forgotten they are illegal. 

Gale goes home with no more talk of rebellion 
between us. But I can't help thinking that everything 
he sees will only strengthen his resolve to fight back. 
The hardships in the mines, the tortured bodies in 
the square, the hunger on the faces of his family. 
Rory has signed up for tesserae, something Gale can't 
even speak about, but it's still not enough with the 



124 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



inconsistent availability and the ever-increasing price 
of food. 

The only bright spot is, I get Haymitch to hire Hazelle 
as a housekeeper, resulting in some extra money for 
her and greatly increasing Haymitch 's standard of 
living. It's weird going into his house, finding it fresh 
and clean, food warming on the stove. He hardly 
notices because he's fighting a whole different battle. 
Peeta and I tried to ration what white liquor we had, 
but it's almost run out, and the last time I saw 
Ripper, she was in the stocks. 

I feel like a pariah when I walk through the streets. 
Everyone avoids me in public now. But there's no 
shortage of company at home. A steady supply of ill 
and injured is deposited in our kitchen before my 
mother, who has long since stopped charging for her 
services. Her stocks of remedies are running so low, 
though, that soon all she'll have to treat the patients 
with is snow. 

The woods, of course, are forbidden. Absolutely. No 
question. Even Gale doesn't challenge this now. But 
one morning, I do. And it isn't the house full of the 
sick and dying, the bleeding backs, the gaunt-faced 
children, the marching boots, or the omnipresent 
misery that drives me under the fence. It's the arrival 
of a crate of wedding dresses one night with a note 
from Effie saying that President Snow approved these 
himself. 

The wedding. Is he really planning to go through with 
it? What, in his twisted brain, will that achieve? Is it 
for the benefit of those in the Capitol? A wedding was 
promised, a wedding will be given. And then he'll kill 
us? As a lesson to the districts? I don't know. I can't 
make sense of it. I toss and turn in bed until I can't 



125 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



stand it anymore. I have to get out of here. At least for 
a few hours. 



My hands dig around in my closet until I find the 
insulated winter gear Cinna made for me for 
recreational use on the Victory Tour. Waterproof 
boots, a snowsuit that covers me from head to toe, 
thermal gloves. I love my old hunting stuff, but the 
trek I have in mind today is more suited to this high- 
tech clothing. I tiptoe downstairs, load my game bag 
with food, and sneak out of the house. Slinking along 
side streets and back alleys, I make my way to the 
weak spot in the fence closest to Rooba the butcher's. 
Since many workers cross this way to get to the 
mines, the snow's pockmarked with footprints. Mine 
will not be noticed. With all his security upgrades, 
Thread has paid little attention to the fence, perhaps 
feeling harsh weather and wild animals are enough to 
keep everyone safely inside. Even so, once I'm under 
the chain link, I cover my tracks until the trees 
conceal them for me. 

Dawn is just breaking as I retrieve a set of bow and 
arrows and begin to force a path through the drifted 
snow in the woods. I'm determined, for some reason, 
to get to the lake. Maybe to say good-bye to the place, 
to my father and the happy times we spent there, 
because I know I'll probably never return. Maybe just 
so I can draw a complete breath again. Part of me 
doesn't really care if they catch me, if I can see it one 
more time. 

The trip takes twice as long as usual. Cinna's clothes 
hold in the heat all right, and I arrive soaked with 
sweat under the snowsuit while my face is numb with 
cold. The glare of the winter sun off the snow has 
played games with my vision, and I am so exhausted 
and wrapped up in my own hopeless thoughts that I 
don't notice the signs. The thin stream of smoke from 



126 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



the chimney, the indentations of recent footprints, the 
smell of steaming pine needles. I am literally a few 
yards from the door of the cement house when I pull 
up short. And that's not because of the smoke or the 
prints or the smell. That's because of the 
unmistakable click of a weapon behind me. 

Second nature. Instinct. I turn, drawing back the 
arrow, although I know already that the odds are not 
in my favor. I see the white Peacekeeper uniform, the 
pointed chin, the light brown iris where my arrow will 
find a home. But the weapon is dropping to the 
ground and the unarmed woman is holding 
something out to me in her gloved hand. 

"Stop!" she cries. 

I waver, unable to process this turn in events. 
Perhaps they have orders to bring me in alive so they 
can torture me into incriminating every person I ever 
knew. Yeah, good luck with that, I think. My fingers 
have all but decided to release the arrow when I see 
the object in the glove. It's a small white circle of flat 
bread. More of a cracker, really. Gray and soggy 
around the edges. But an image is clearly stamped in 
the center of it. 



127 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



PART II 
"THE QUELL" 



128 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



10 



It's my mockingjay. 

It makes no sense. My bird baked into bread. Unlike 
the stylish renderings I saw in the Capitol, this is 
definitely not a fashion statement. "What is it? What 
does that mean?" I ask harshly, still prepared to kill. 

"It means we're on your side," says a tremulous voice 
behind me. 

I didn't see her when I came up. She must have been 
in the house. I don't take my eyes off my current 
target. Probably the newcomer is armed, but I'm 
betting she won't risk letting me hear the click that 
would mean my death was imminent, knowing I 
would instantly kill her companion. "Come around 
where I can see you," I order. 

"She can't, she's — " begins the woman with the 
cracker. 

"Come around!" I shout. There's a step and a dragging 
sound. I can hear the effort the movement requires. 
Another woman, or maybe I should call her a girl 
since she looks about my age, limps into view. She's 
dressed in an ill-fitting Peacekeeper's uniform 
complete with the white fur cloak, but it's several 
sizes too large for her slight frame. She carries no 
visible weapon. Her hands are occupied with 
steadying a rough crutch made from a broken 
branch. The toe of her right boot can't clear the snow, 
hence the dragging. 

I examine the girl's face, which is bright red from the 
cold. Her teeth are crooked and there's a strawberry 
129 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



birthmark over one of her chocolate brown eyes. This 
is no Peacekeeper. No citizen of the Capitol, either. 

"Who are you?" I ask warily but less belligerently. 

"My name's Twill," says the woman. She's older. 
Maybe thirty-five or so. "And this is Bonnie. We've run 
away from District Eight." 

District 8! Then they must know about the uprising! 

"Where 'd you get the uniforms?" I ask. 

"I stole them from the factory," says Bonnie. "We 
make them there. Only I thought this one would be 
for... for someone else. That's why it fits so poorly." 

"The gun came from a dead Peacekeeper," says Twill, 
following my eyes. 

"That cracker in your hand. With the bird. What's 
that about?" I ask. 

"Don't you know, Katniss?" Bonnie appears genuinely 
surprised. 

They recognize me. Of course they recognize me. My 
face is uncovered and I'm standing here outside of 
District 12 pointing an arrow at them. Who else 
would I be? "I know it matches the pin I wore in the 
arena." 

"She doesn't know," says Bonnie softly. "Maybe not 
about any of it." 

Suddenly I feel the need to appear on top of things. "I 
know you had an uprising in Eight." 

"Yes, that's why we had to get out," says Twill. 



130 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Well, you're good and out now. What are you going to 
do?" I ask. 

"We're headed for District Thirteen," Twill replies. 

"Thirteen?" I say. "There's no Thirteen. It got blown off 
the map." 

"Seventy-five years ago," says Twill. 

Bonnie shifts on her crutch and winces. 

"What's wrong with your leg?" I ask. 

"I twisted my ankle. My boots are too big," says 
Bonnie. 

I bite my lip. My instinct tells me they're telling the 
truth. And behind that truth is a whole lot of 
information I'd like to get. I step forward and retrieve 
Twill's gun before lowering my bow, though. Then I 
hesitate a moment, thinking of another day in this 
woods, when Gale and I watched a hovercraft appear 
out of thin air and capture two escapees from the 
Capitol. The boy was speared and killed. The 
redheaded girl, I found out when I went to the 
Capitol, was mutilated and turned into a mute 
servant called an Avox. "Anyone after you?" 

"We don't think so. We think they believe we were 
killed in a factory explosion," says Twill. "Only a fluke 
that we weren't." 

"All right, let's go inside," I say, nodding at the cement 
house. I follow them in, carrying the gun. 

Bonnie makes straight for the hearth and lowers 
herself onto a Peacekeeper's cloak that has been 
spread before it. She holds her hands to the feeble 



131 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



flame that burns on one end of a charred log. Her 
skin is so pale as to be translucent and I can see the 
fire glow through her flesh. Twill tries to arrange the 
cloak, which must have been her own, around the 
shivering girl. 

A tin gallon can has been cut in half, the lip ragged 
and dangerous. It sits in the ashes, filled with a 
handful of pine needles steaming in water. 

"Making tea?" I ask. 

"We're not sure, really. I remember seeing someone do 
this with pine needles on the Hunger Games a few 
years back. At least, I think it was pine needles," says 
Twill with a frown. 

I remember District 8, an ugly urban place stinking of 
industrial fumes, the people housed in run-down 
tenements. Barely a blade of grass in sight. No 
opportunity, ever, to learn the ways of nature. It's a 
miracle these two have made it this far. 

"Out of food?" I ask. 

Bonnie nods. "We took what we could, but food's been 
so scarce. That's been gone for a while." The quaver in 
her voice melts my remaining defenses. She is just a 
malnourished, injured girl fleeing the Capitol. 

"Well, then this is your lucky day," I say, dropping my 
game bag on the floor. People are starving all over the 
district and we still have more than enough. So I've 
been spreading things around a little. I have my own 
priorities: Gale's family, Greasy Sae, some of the other 
Hob traders who were shut down. My mother has 
other people, patients mostly, who she wants to help. 
This morning I purposely overstuffed my game bag 
with food, knowing my mother would see the depleted 
132 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



pantry and assume I was making my rounds to the 
hungry. I was actually buying time to go to the lake 
without her worrying. I intended to deliver the food 
this evening on my return, but now I can see that 
won't be happening. 

From the bag I pull two fresh buns with a layer of 
cheese baked into the top. We always seem to have a 
supply of these since Peeta found out they were my 
favorite. I toss one to Twill but cross over and place 
the other on Bonnie's lap since her hand-eye 
coordination seems a little questionable at the 
moment and I don't want the thing ending up in the 
fire. 

"Oh," says Bonnie. "Oh, is this all for me?" 

Something inside me twists as I remember another 
voice. Rue. In the arena. When I gave her the leg of 
groosling. "Oh, I've never had a whole leg to myself 
before. " The disbelief of the chronically hungry. 

"Yeah, eat up," I say. Bonnie holds the bun as if she 
can't quite believe it's real and then sinks her teeth 
into it again and again, unable to stop. "It's better if 
you chew it." She nods, trying to slow down, but I 
know how hard it is when you're that hollow. "I think 
your tea's done." I scoot the tin can from the ashes. 
Twill finds two tin cups in her pack and I dip out the 
tea, setting it on the floor to cool. They huddle 
together, eating, blowing on their tea, and taking tiny, 
scalding sips as I build up the fire. I wait until they 
are sucking the grease from their fingers to ask, "So, 
what's your story?" And they tell me. 

Ever since the Hunger Games, the discontent in 
District 8 had been growing. It was always there, of 
course, to some degree. But what differed was that 
talk was no longer sufficient, and the idea of taking 
133 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



action went from a wish to a reality. The textile 
factories that service Panem are loud with machinery, 
and the din also allowed word to pass safely, a pair of 
lips close to an ear, words unnoticed, unchecked. 
Twill taught at school, Bonnie was one of her pupils, 
and when the final bell had rung, both of them spent 
a four-hour shift at the factory that specialized in the 
Peacekeeper uniforms. It took months for Bonnie, 
who worked in the chilly inspection dock, to secure 
the two uniforms, a boot here, a pair of pants there. 
They were intended for Twill and her husband 
because it was understood that, once the uprising 
began, it would be crucial to get word of it out beyond 
District 8 if it were to spread and be successful. 

The day Peeta and I came through and made our 
Victory Tour appearance was actually a rehearsal of 
sorts. People in the crowd positioned themselves 
according to their teams, next to the buildings they 
would target when the rebellion broke out. That was 
the plan: to take over the centers of power in the city 
like the Justice Building, the Peacekeepers' 
Headquarters, and the Communication Center in the 
square. And at other locations in the district: the 
railroad, the granary, the power station, and the 
armory. 

The night of my engagement, the night Peeta fell to 
his knees and proclaimed his undying love for me in 
front of the cameras in the Capitol, was the night the 
uprising began. It was an ideal cover. Our Victory 
Tour interview with Caesar Flickerman was 
mandatory viewing. It gave the people of District 8 a 
reason to be out on the streets after dark, gathering 
either in the square or in various community centers 
around the city to watch. Ordinarily such activity 
would have been too suspicious. Instead everyone 
was in place by the appointed hour, eight o'clock, 
when the masks went on and all hell broke loose. 



134 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Taken by surprise and overwhelmed by sheer 
numbers, the Peacekeepers were initially overcome by 
the crowds. The Communication Center, the granary, 
and the power station were all secured. As the 
Peacekeepers fell, weapons were appropriated for the 
rebels. There was hope that this had not been an act 
of madness, that in some way, if they could get the 
word out to other districts, an actual overthrow of the 
government in the Capitol might be possible. 

But then the ax fell. Peacekeepers began to arrive by 
the thousands. Hovercraft bombed the rebel 
strongholds into ashes. In the utter chaos that 
followed, it was all people could do to make it back to 
their homes alive. It took less than forty-eight hours 
to subdue the city. Then, for a week, there was a 
lockdown. No food, no coal, everyone forbidden to 
leave their homes. The only time the television 
showed anything but static was when the suspected 
instigators were hanged in the square. Then one 
night, as the whole district was on the brink of 
starvation, came the order to return to business as 
usual. 

That meant school for Twill and Bonnie. A street 
made impassable by the bombs caused them to be 
late for their factory shift, so they were still a hundred 
yards away when it exploded, killing everyone 
inside — including Twill's husband and Bonnie's entire 
family. 

"Someone must have told the Capitol that the idea for 
the uprising had started there," Twill tells me faintly. 

The two fled back to Twill's, where the Peacekeeper 
suits were still waiting. They scraped together what 
provisions they could, stealing freely from neighbors 
they now knew to be dead, and made it to the railroad 
station. In a warehouse near the tracks, they changed 
135 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



into the Peacekeeper outfits and, disguised, were able 
to make it onto a boxcar full of fabric on a train 
headed to District 6. They fled the train at a fuel stop 
along the way and traveled on foot. Concealed by 
woods, but using the tracks for guidance, they made 
it to the outskirts of District 12 two days ago, where 
they were forced to stop when Bonnie twisted her 
ankle. 

"I understand why you're running, but what do you 
expect to find in District Thirteen?" I ask. 

Bonnie and Twill exchange a nervous glance. "We're 
not sure exactly," Twill says. 

"It's nothing but rubble," I say. "We've all seen the 
footage." 

"That's just it. They've been using the same footage 
for as long as anyone in District Eight can 
remember," says Twill. 

"Really?" I try to think back, to call up the images of 
13 I've seen on television. 

"You know how they always show the Justice 
Building?" Twill continues. I nod. I've seen it a 
thousand times. "If you look very carefully, you 11 see 
it. Up in the far right-hand corner." 

"See what?" I ask. 

Twill holds out her cracker with the bird again. "A 
mockingjay. Just a glimpse of it as it flies by. The 
same one every time." 

"Back home, we think they keep reusing the old 
footage because the Capitol can't show what's really 
there now," says Bonnie. 



136 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I give a grunt of disbelief. "You're going to District 
Thirteen based on that? A shot of a bird? You think 
you're going to find some new city with people 
strolling around in it? And that's just fine with the 
Capitol?" 

"No," Twill says earnestly. "We think the people 
moved underground when everything on the surface 
was destroyed. We think they've managed to survive. 
And we think the Capitol leaves them alone because, 
before the Dark Days, District Thirteen's principal 
industry was nuclear development." 

"They were graphite miners," I say. But then I 
hesitate, because that's information I got from the 
Capitol. 

"They had a few small mines, yes. But not enough to 
justify a population of that size. That, I guess, is the 
only thing we know for sure," says Twill. 

My heart's beating too quickly. What if they're right? 
Could it be true? Could there be somewhere to run 
besides the wilderness? Somewhere safe? If a 
community exists in District 13, would it be better to 
go there, where I might be able to accomplish 
something, instead of waiting here for my death? But 
then... if there are people in District 13, with powerful 
weapons... 

"Why haven't they helped us?" I say angrily. "If it's 
true, why do they leave us to live like this? With the 
hunger and the killings and the Games?" And 
suddenly I hate this imaginary underground city of 
District 13 and those who sit by, watching us die. 
They're no better than the Capitol. 

"We don't know," Bonnie whispers. "Right now, we're 

just holding on to the hope that they exist." 

137 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



That snaps me to my senses. These are delusions. 
District 13 doesn't exist because the Capitol would 
never let it exist. They're probably mistaken about the 
footage. Mockingj ays are about as rare as rocks. And 
about as tough. If they could survive the initial 
bombing of 13, they're probably doing better than 
ever now. 

Bonnie has no home. Her family is dead. Returning to 
District 8 or assimilating into another district would 
be impossible. Of course the idea of an independent, 
thriving District 13 draws her. I can't bring myself to 
tell her she's chasing a dream as insubstantial as a 
wisp of smoke. Perhaps she and Twill can carve out a 
life somehow in the woods. I doubt it, but they're so 
pitiful I have to try to help. 

First I give them all the food in my pack, grain and 
dried beans mostly, but there's enough to hold them 
for a while if they're careful. Then I take Twill out in 
the woods and try to explain the basics of hunting. 
She's got a weapon that if necessary can convert solar 
energy into deadly rays of power, so that could last 
indefinitely. When she manages to kill her first 
squirrel, the poor thing is mostly a charred mess 
because it took a direct hit to the body. But I show 
her how to skin and clean it. With some practice, 
she'll figure it out. I cut a new crutch for Bonnie. 
Back at the house, I peel off an extra layer of socks 
for the girl, telling her to stuff them in the toes of her 
boots to walk, then wear them on her feet at night. 
Finally I teach them how to build a proper fire. 

They beg me for details of the situation in District 12 
and I tell them about life under Thread. I can see they 
think this is important information that they'll be 
bringing to those who run District 13, and I play 
along so as not to destroy their hopes. But when the 



138 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



light signals late afternoon, I'm out of time to humor 
them. 

"I have to go now," I say. 

They pour out thanks and embrace me. 

Tears spill from Bonnie's eyes. "I can't believe we 
actually got to meet you. You're practically all 
anyone's talked about since — " 

"I know. I know. Since I pulled out those berries," I 
say tiredly. 

I hardly notice the walk home even though a wet 
snow begins to fall. My mind is spinning with new 
information about the uprising in District 8 and the 
unlikely but tantalizing possibility of District 13. 

Listening to Bonnie and Twill confirmed one thing: 
President Snow has been playing me for a fool. All the 
kisses and endearments in the world couldn't have 
derailed the momentum building up in District 8. Yes, 
my holding out the berries had been the spark, but I 
had no way to control the fire. He must have known 
that. So why visit my home, why order me to 
persuade the crowd of my love for Peeta? 

It was obviously a ploy to distract me and keep me 
from doing anything else inflammatory in the 
districts. And to entertain the people in the Capitol, of 
course. I suppose the wedding is just a necessary 
extension of that. 

I'm nearing the fence when a mockingjay lights on a 
branch and trills at me. At the sight of it I realize I 
never got a full explanation of the bird on the cracker 
and what it signifies. 



139 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"It means we're on your side. "That's what Bonnie 
said. I have people on my side? What side? Am I 
unwittingly the face of the hoped-for rebellion? Has 
the mockingj ay on my pin become a symbol of 
resistance? If so, my side's not doing too well. You 
only have to look at what happened in 8 to know that. 

I stash my weapons in the hollow log nearest my old 
home in the Seam and head for the fence. I'm 
crouched on one knee, preparing to enter the 
Meadow, but I'm still so preoccupied with the day's 
events that it takes a sudden screech of an owl to 
bring me to my senses. 

In the fading light, the chain links look as innocuous 
as usual. But what makes me jerk back my hand is 
the sound, like the buzz of a tree full of tracker jacker 
nests, indicating the fence is alive with electricity. 



140 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



My feet back up automatically and I blend into the 
trees. I cover my mouth with my glove to disperse the 
white of my breath in the icy air. Adrenaline courses 
through me, wiping all the concerns of the day from 
my mind as I focus on the immediate threat before 
me. What is going on? Has Thread turned on the 
fence as an additional security precaution? Or does 
he somehow know I've escaped his net today? Is he 
determined to strand me outside District 12 until he 
can apprehend and arrest me? Drag me to the square 
to be locked in the stockade or whipped or hanged? 

Calm down, I order myself. It's not as if this is the 
first time I've been caught outside of the district by an 
electrified fence. It's happened a few times over the 
years, but Gale was always with me. The two of us 
would just pick a comfortable tree to hang out in until 
the power shut off, which it always did eventually. If I 
was running late, Prim even got in the habit of going 
to the Meadow to check if the fence was charged, to 
spare my mother worry. 

But today my family would never imagine I'd be in the 
woods. I've even taken steps to mislead them. So if I 
don't show up, worry they will. And there's a part of 
me that's worried, too, because I'm not sure it's just a 
coincidence, the power coming on the very day I 
return to the woods. 

I thought no one saw me sneak under the fence, but 
who knows? There are always eyes for hire. Someone 
reported Gale kissing me in that very spot. Still, that 
was in daylight and before I was more careful about 
my behavior. Could there be surveillance cameras? 
I've wondered about this before. Is this the way 
141 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



President Snow knows about the kiss? It was dark 
when I went under and my face was bundled in a 
scarf. But the list of suspects likely to be trespassing 
into the woods is probably very short. 

My eyes peer through the trees, past the fence, into 
the Meadow. All I can see is the wet snow illuminated 
here and there by the light from the windows on the 
edge of the Seam. No Peacekeepers in sight, no signs I 
am being hunted. Whether Thread knows I left the 
district today or not, I realize my course of action 
must be the same: to get back inside the fence 
unseen and pretend I never left. 

Any contact with the chain link or the coils of barbed 
wire that guard the top would mean instant 
electrocution. I don't think I can burrow under the 
fence without risking detection, and the ground's 
frozen hard, anyway. That leaves only one choice. 
Somehow I'm going to have to go over it. 

I begin to skirt along the tree line, searching for a tree 
with a branch high and long enough to fit my needs. 
After about a mile, I come upon an old maple that 
might do. The trunk is too wide and icy to shinny up, 
though, and there are no low branches. I climb a 
neighboring tree and leap precariously into the maple, 
almost losing my hold on the slick bark. But I manage 
to get a grip and slowly inch my way out on a limb 
that hangs above the barbed wire. 

As I look down, I remember why Gale and I always 
waited in the woods rather than try to tackle the 
fence. Being high enough to avoid getting fried means 
you've got to be at least twenty feet in the air. I guess 
my branch must be twenty-five. That's a dangerously 
long drop, even for someone who's had years of 
practice in trees. But what choice do I have? I could 
look for another branch, but it's almost dark now. 



142 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



The falling snow will obscure any moonlight. Here, at 
least, I can see I've got a snowbank to cushion my 
landing. Even if I could find another, which is 
doubtful, who knows what I'd be jumping into? I 
throw my empty game bag around my neck and 
slowly lower myself until I'm hanging by my hands. 
For a moment, I gather my courage. Then I release my 
fingers. 

There's the sensation of falling, then I hit the ground 
with a jolt that goes right up my spine. A second later, 
my rear end slams the ground. I lie in the snow, 
trying to assess the damage. Without standing, I can 
tell by the pain in my left heel and my tailbone that 
I'm injured. The only question is how badly. I'm 
hoping for bruises, but when I force myself onto my 
feet, I suspect I've broken something as well. I can 
walk, though, so I get moving, trying to hide my limp 
as best I can. 

My mother and Prim can't know I was in the woods. I 
need to work up some sort of alibi, no matter how 
thin. Some of the shops in the square are still open, 
so I go in one and purchase white cloth for bandages. 
We're running low, anyway. In another, I buy a bag of 
sweets for Prim. I stick one of the candies in my 
mouth, feeling the peppermint melt on my tongue, 
and realize it's the first thing I've eaten all day. I 
meant to make a meal at the lake, but once I saw 
Twill and Bonnie's condition, it seemed wrong to take 
a single mouthful from them. 

By the time I reach my house, my left heel will bear 
no weight at all. I decide to tell my mother I was 
trying to mend a leak in the roof of our old house and 
slid off. As for the missing food, 111 just be vague 
about who I handed it out to. I drag myself in the 
door, all ready to collapse in front of the fire. But 
instead I get another shock. 

143 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Two Peacekeepers, a man and a woman, are standing 
in the doorway to our kitchen. The woman remains 
impassive, but I catch the flicker of surprise on the 
man's face. I am unanticipated. They know I was in 
the woods and should be trapped there now. 

"Hello," I say in a neutral voice. 

My mother appears behind them, but keeps her 
distance. "Here she is, just in time for dinner," she 
says a little too brightly. I'm very late for dinner. 

I consider removing my boots as I normally would but 
doubt I can manage it without revealing my injuries. 
Instead I just pull off my wet hood and shake the 
snow from my hair. "Can I help you with something?" 
I ask the Peacekeepers. 

"Head Peacekeeper Thread sent us with a message for 
you," says the woman. 

"They've been waiting for hours," my mother adds. 

They've been waiting for me to fail to return. To 
confirm I got electrocuted by the fence or trapped in 
the woods so they could take my family in for 
questioning. 

"Must be an important message," I say. 

"May we ask where you've been, Miss Everdeen?" the 
woman asks. 

"Easier to ask where I haven't been," I say with a 
sound of exasperation. I cross into the kitchen, 
forcing myself to use my foot normally even though 
every step is excruciating. I pass between the 
Peacekeepers and make it to the table all right. I fling 
my bag down and turn to Prim, who's standing stiffly 

144 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



by the hearth. Haymitch and Peeta are there as well, 
sitting in a pair of matching rockers, playing a game 
of chess. Were they here by chance or "invited" by the 
Peacekeepers? Either way, I'm glad to see them. 

"So where haven't you been?" says Haymitch in a 
bored voice. 

"Well, I haven't been talking to the Goat Man about 
getting Prim's goat pregnant, because someone gave 
me completely inaccurate information as to where he 
lives," I say to Prim emphatically. 

"No, I didn't," says Prim. "I told you exactly." 

"You said he lives beside the west entrance to the 
mine," I say. 

"The east entrance," Prim corrects me. 

"You distinctly said the west, because then I said, 
'Next to the slag heap?' and you said, Yeah,'" I say. 

"The slag heap next to the east entrance," says Prim 
patiently. 

"No. When did you say that?" I demand. "Last night," 
Haymitch chimes in. 

"It was definitely the east," adds Peeta. He looks at 
Haymitch and they laugh. I glare at Peeta and he tries 
to look contrite. "I'm sorry, but it's what I've been 
saying. You don't listen when people talk to you." 

"Bet people told you he didn't live there today and you 
didn't listen again," says Haymitch. 

"Shut up, Haymitch," I say, clearly indicating he's 
right. 



145 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Haymitch and Peeta crack up and Prim allows herself 
a smile. 

"Fine. Somebody else can arrange to get the stupid 
goat knocked up," I say, which makes them laugh 
more. And I think, This is why they've made it this far, 
Haymitch and Peeta. Nothing throws them. 

I look at the Peacekeepers. The man's smiling but the 
woman is unconvinced. "What's in the bag?" she asks 
sharply. 

I know she's hoping for game or wild plants. 
Something that clearly condemns me. I dump the 
contents on the table. "See for yourself." 

"Oh, good," says my mother, examining the cloth. 
"We're running low on bandages." 

Peeta comes to the table and opens the candy bag. 
"Ooh, peppermints," he says, popping one in his 
mouth. 

"They're mine." I take a swipe for the bag. He tosses it 
to Haymitch, who stuffs a fistful of sweets in his 
mouth before passing the bag to a giggling Prim. 
"None of you deserves candy!" I say. 

"What, because we're right?" Peeta wraps his arms 
around me. I give a small yelp of pain as my tailbone 
objects. I try to turn it into a sound of indignation, 
but I can see in his eyes that he knows I'm hurt. 
"Okay, Prim said west. I distinctly heard west. And 
we're all idiots. How's that?" 

"Better," I say, and accept his kiss. Then I look at the 
Peacekeepers as if I'm suddenly remembering they're 
there. "You have a message for me?" 



146 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"From Head Peacekeeper Thread," says the woman. 
"He wanted you to know that the fence surrounding 
District Twelve will now have electricity twenty-four 
hours a day." 

"Didn't it already?" I ask, a little too innocently. 

"He thought you might be interested in passing this 
information on to your cousin," says the woman. 

"Thank you. I'll tell him. I'm sure we'll all sleep a little 
more soundly now that security has addressed that 
lapse." I'm pushing things, I know it, but the 
comment gives me a sense of satisfaction. 

The woman's jaw tightens. None of this has gone as 
planned, but she has no further orders. She gives me 
a curt nod and leaves, the man trailing in her wake. 
When my mother has locked the door behind them, I 
slump against the table. 

"What is it?" says Peeta, holding me steadily. 

"Oh, I banged up my left foot. The heel. And my tail- 
bone's had a bad day, too." He helps me over to one of 
the rockers and I lower myself onto the padded 
cushion. 

My mother eases off my boots. "What happened?" 

"I slipped and fell," I say. Four pairs of eyes look at 
me with disbelief. "On some ice." But we all know the 
house must be bugged and it's not safe to talk openly. 
Not here, not now. 

Having stripped off my sock, my mother's fingers 
probe the bones in my left heel and I wince. "There 
might be a break," she says. She checks the other 



147 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



foot. "This one seems all right." She judges my 
tailbone to be badly bruised. 

Prim's dispatched to get my pajamas and robe. When 
I'm changed, my mother makes a snow pack for my 
left heel and props it up on a hassock. I eat three 
bowls of stew and half a loaf of bread while the others 
dine at the table. I stare at the fire, thinking of Bonnie 
and Twill, hoping that the heavy, wet snow has erased 
my tracks. 

Prim comes and sits on the floor next to me, leaning 
her head against my knee. We suck on peppermints 
as I brush her soft blond hair back behind her ear. 
"How was school?" I ask. 

"All right. We learned about coal by-products," she 
says. We stare at the fire for a while. "Are you going to 
try on your wedding dresses?" 

"Not tonight. Tomorrow probably," I say. 

"Wait until I get home, okay?" she says. 

"Sure." If they don't arrest me first. 

My mother gives me a cup of chamomile tea with a 
dose of sleep syrup, and my eyelids begin to droop 
immediately. She wraps my bad foot, and Peeta 
volunteers to get me to bed. I start out by leaning on 
his shoulder, but I'm so wobbly he just scoops me up 
and carries me upstairs. He tucks me in and says 
good night but I catch his hand and hold him there. A 
side effect of the sleep syrup is that it makes people 
less inhibited, like white liquor, and I know I have to 
control my tongue. But I don't want him to go. In fact, 
I want him to climb in with me, to be there when the 
nightmares hit tonight. For some reason that I can't 
quite form, I know I'm not allowed to ask that. 



148 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Don't go yet. Not until I fall asleep," I say. 



Peeta sits on the side of the bed, warming my hand in 
both of his. "Almost thought you'd changed your mind 
today. When you were late for dinner." 

I'm foggy but I can guess what he means. With the 
fence going on and me showing up late and the 
Peacekeepers waiting, he thought I'd made a run for 
it, maybe with Gale. 

"No, I'd have told you," I say. I pull his hand up and 
lean my cheek against the back of it, taking in the 
faint scent of cinnamon and dill from the breads he 
must have baked today. I want to tell him about Twill 
and Bonnie and the uprising and the fantasy of 
District 13, but it's not safe to and I can feel myself 
slipping away, so I just get out one more sentence. 
"Stay with me." 

As the tendrils of sleep syrup pull me down, I hear 
him whisper a word back, but I don't quite catch it. 

My mother lets me sleep until noon, then rouses me 
to examine my heel. I'm ordered to a week of bed rest 
and I don't object because I feel so lousy. Not just my 
heel and my tailbone. My whole body aches with 
exhaustion. So I let my mother doctor me and feed me 
breakfast in bed and tuck another quilt around me. 
Then I just lie there, staring out my window at the 
winter sky, pondering how on earth this will all turn 
out. I think a lot about Bonnie and Twill, and the pile 
of white wedding dresses downstairs, and if Thread 
will figure out how I got back in and arrest me. It's 
funny, because he could just arrest me, anyway, 
based on past crimes, but maybe he has to have 
something really irrefutable to do it, now that I'm a 
victor. And I wonder if President Snow's in contact 
with Thread. I think it's unlikely he ever 



149 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



acknowledged that old Cray existed, but now that I'm 
such a nationwide problem, is he carefully instructing 
Thread what to do? Or is Thread acting on his own? 
At any rate, I'm sure they'd both agree on keeping me 
locked up here inside the district with that fence. 
Even if I could figure out some way to escape — maybe 
get a rope up to that maple tree branch and climb 
out — there 'd be no escaping with my family and 
friends now. I told Gale I would stay and fight, 
anyway. 

For the next few days, I jump every time there's a 
knock on the door. No Peacekeepers show up to 
arrest me, though, so eventually I begin to relax. I'm 
further reassured when Peeta casually tells me the 
power is off in sections of the fence because crews are 
out securing the base of the chain link to the ground. 
Thread must believe I somehow got under the thing, 
even with that deadly current running through it. It's 
a break for the district, having the Peacekeepers busy 
doing something besides abusing people. 

Peeta comes by every day to bring me cheese buns 
and begins to help me work on the family book. It's 
an old thing, made of parchment and leather. Some 
herbalist on my mother's side of the family started it 
ages ago. The book's composed of page after page of 
ink drawings of plants with descriptions of their 
medical uses. My father added a section on edible 
plants that was my guidebook to keeping us alive 
after his death. For a long time, I've wanted to record 
my own knowledge in it. Things I learned from 
experience or from Gale, and then the information I 
picked up when I was training for the Games. I didn't 
because I'm no artist and it's so crucial that the 
pictures are drawn in exact detail. That's where Peeta 
comes in. Some of the plants he knows already, 
others we have dried samples of, and others I have to 
describe. He makes sketches on scrap paper until I'm 
150 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



satisfied they're right, then I let him draw them in the 
book. After that, I carefully print all I know about the 
plant. 

It's quiet, absorbing work that helps take my mind off 
my troubles. I like to watch his hands as he works, 
making a blank page bloom with strokes of ink, 
adding touches of color to our previously black and 
yellowish book. His face takes on a special look when 
he concentrates. His usual easy expression is 
replaced by something more intense and removed 
that suggests an entire world locked away inside him. 
I've seen flashes of this before: in the arena, or when 
he speaks to a crowd, or that time he shoved the 
Peacekeepers' guns away from me in District 1 1. I 
don't know quite what to make of it. I also become a 
little fixated on his eyelashes, which ordinarily you 
don't notice much because they're so blond. But up 
close, in the sunlight slanting in from the window, 
they're a light golden color and so long I don't see how 
they keep from getting all tangled up when he blinks. 

One afternoon Peeta stops shading a blossom and 
looks up so suddenly that I start, as though I were 
caught spying on him, which in a strange way maybe 
I was. But he only says, "You know, I think this is the 
first time we've ever done anything normal together." 

"Yeah," I agree. Our whole relationship has been 
tainted by the Games. Normal was never a part of it. 
"Nice for a change." 

Each afternoon he carries me downstairs for a change 
of scenery and I unnerve everyone by turning on the 
television. Usually we only watch when it's 
mandatory, because the mixture of propaganda and 
displays of the Capitol's power — including clips from 
seventy-four years of Hunger Games — is so odious. 
But now I'm looking for something special. The 

151 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



mocking]' ay that Bonnie and Twill are basing all their 
hopes on. I know it's probably foolishness, but if it is, 
I want to rule it out. And erase the idea of a thriving 
District 13 from my mind for good. 

My first sighting is in a news story referencing the 
Dark Days. I see the smoldering remains of the 
Justice Building in District 13 and just catch the 
black-and-white underside of a mockingjay's wing as 
it flies across the upper right-hand corner. That 
doesn't prove anything, really. It's just an old shot 
that goes with an old tale. 

However, several days later, something else grabs my 
attention. The main newscaster is reading a piece 
about a shortage of graphite affecting the 
manufacturing of items in District 3. They cut to what 
is supposed to be live footage of a female reporter, 
encased in a protective suit, standing in front of the 
ruins of the Justice Building in 13. Through her 
mask, she reports that unfortunately a study has just 
today determined that the mines of District 13 are 
still too toxic to approach. End of story. But just 
before they cut back to the main newscaster, I see the 
unmistakable flash of that same mockingjays wing. 

The reporter has simply been incorporated into the 
old footage. She's not in District 13 at all. Which begs 
the question, What is? 



152 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Staying quietly in bed is harder after that. I want to 
be doing something, finding out more about District 
13 or helping in the cause to bring down the Capitol. 
Instead I sit around stuffing myself with cheese buns 
and watching Peeta sketch. Haymitch stops by 
occasionally to bring me news from town, which is 
always bad. More people being punished or dropping 
from starvation. 

Winter has begun to withdraw by the time my foot is 
deemed usable. My mother gives me exercises to do 
and lets me walk on my own a bit. I go to sleep one 
night, determined to go into town the next morning, 
but I awake to find Venia, Octavia, and Flavius 
grinning down at me. 

"Surprise!" they squeal. "We're here early!" 

After I took that lash in the face, Haymitch got their 
visit pushed back several months so I could heal up. I 
wasn't expecting them for another three weeks. But I 
try to act delighted that my bridal photo shoot is here 
at last. My mother hung up all the dresses, so they're 
ready to go, but to be honest, I haven't even tried one 
on. 

After the usual histrionics about the deteriorated 
state of my beauty, they get right down to business. 
Their biggest concern is my face, although I think my 
mother did a pretty remarkable job healing it. There's 
just a pale pink strip across my cheekbone. The 
whipping's not common knowledge, so I tell them I 
slipped on the ice and cut it. And then I realize that's 
my same excuse for hurting my foot, which is going to 
make walking in high heels a problem. But Flavius, 
153 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Octavia, and Venia aren't the suspicious types, so I'm 
safe there. 

Since I only have to look hairless for a few hours 
instead of several weeks, I get to be shaved instead of 
waxed. I still have to soak in a tub of something, but 
it isn't vile, and we're on to my hair and makeup 
before I know it. The team, as usual, is full of news, 
which I usually do my best to tune out. But then 
Octavia makes a comment that catches my attention. 
It's a passing remark, really, about how she couldn't 
get shrimp for a party, but it tugs at me. 

"Why couldn't you get shrimp? Is it out of season?" I 
ask. 

"Oh, Katniss, we haven't been able to get any seafood 
for weeks!" says Octavia. "You know, because the 
weather's been so bad in District Four." 

My mind starts buzzing. No seafood. For weeks. From 
District 4. The barely concealed rage in the crowd 
during the Victory Tour. And suddenly I am 
absolutely sure that District 4 has revolted. 

I begin to question them casually about what other 
hardships this winter has brought them. They are not 
used to want, so any little disruption in supply makes 
an impact on them. By the time I'm ready to be 
dressed, their complaints about the difficulty of 
getting different products — from crabmeat to music 
chips to ribbons — has given me a sense of which 
districts might actually be rebelling. Seafood from 
District 4. Electronic gadgets from District 3. And, of 
course, fabrics from District 8. The thought of such 
widespread rebellion has me quivering with fear and 
excitement. 



154 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I want to ask them more, but Cinna appears to give 
me a hug and check my makeup. His attention goes 
right to the scar on my cheek. Somehow I don't think 
he believes the slipping-on-the-ice story, but he 
doesn't question it. He simply adjusts the powder on 
my face, and what little you can see of the lash mark 
vanishes. 

Downstairs, the living room has been cleared and lit 
for the photo shoot. Effie's having a fine time ordering 
everybody around, keeping us all on schedule. It's 
probably a good thing, because there are six gowns 
and each one requires its own headpiece, shoes, 
jewelry, hair, makeup, setting, and lighting. Creamy 
lace and pink roses and ringlets. Ivory satin and gold 
tattoos and greenery. A sheath of diamonds and 
jeweled veil and moonlight. Heavy white silk and 
sleeves that fall from my wrist to the floor, and pearls. 
The moment one shot has been approved, we move 
right into preparing for the next. I feel like dough, 
being kneaded and reshaped again and again. My 
mother manages to feed me bits of food and sips of 
tea while they work on me, but by the time the shoot 
is over, I'm starving and exhausted. I'm hoping to 
spend some time with Cinna now, but Effie whisks 
everybody out the door and I have to make do with 
the promise of a phone call. 

Evening has fallen and my foot hurts from all the 
crazy shoes, so I abandon any thoughts of going into 
town. Instead I go upstairs and wash away the layers 
of makeup and conditioners and dyes and then go 
down to dry my hair by the fire. Prim, who came 
home from school in time to see the last two dresses, 
chatters on about them with my mother. They both 
seem overly happy about the photo shoot. When I fall 
into bed, I realize it's because they think it means I'm 
safe. That the Capitol has overlooked my interference 
with the whipping since no one is going to go to such 
155 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



trouble and expense for someone they plan on killing, 
anyway. Right. 

In my nightmare, I'm dressed in the silk bridal gown, 
but it's torn and muddy. The long sleeves keep getting 
caught on thorns and branches as I run through the 
woods. The pack of muttation tributes draws closer 
and closer until it overcomes me with hot breath and 
dripping fangs and I scream myself awake. 

It's too close to dawn to bother trying to get back to 
sleep. Besides, today I really have to get out and talk 
to someone. Gale will be unreachable in the mines. 
But I need Haymitch or Peeta or somebody to share 
the burden of all that has happened to me since I 
went to the lake. Fleeing outlaws, electrified fences, 
an independent District 13, shortages in the Capitol. 
Everything. 

I eat breakfast with my mother and Prim and head 
out in search of a confidant. The air's warm with 
hopeful hints of spring in it. Spring would be a good 
time for an uprising, I think. Everyone feels less 
vulnerable once winter passes. Peeta's not home. I 
guess he's already gone into town. I'm surprised to 
see Haymitch moving around his kitchen so early, 
though. I walk into his house without knocking. I can 
hear Hazelle upstairs, sweeping the floors of the now- 
spotless house. Haymitch isn't flat-out drunk, but he 
doesn't look too steady, either. I guess the rumors 
about Ripper being back in business are true. I'm 
thinking maybe I better let him just go to bed, when 
he suggests a walk to town. 

Haymitch and I can speak in a kind of shorthand 
now. In a few minutes I've updated him and he's told 
me about rumors of uprisings in Districts 7 and 1 1 as 
well. If my hunches are right, this would mean almost 
half the districts have at least attempted to rebel. 



156 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Do you still think it won't work here?" I ask. 



"Not yet. Those other districts, they're much larger. 
Even if half the people cower in their homes, the 
rebels stand a chance. Here in Twelve, it's got to be all 
of us or nothing," he says. 

I hadn't thought of that. How we lack strength of 
numbers. "But maybe at some point?" I insist. 

"Maybe. But we're small, we're weak, and we don't 
develop nuclear weapons," says Haymitch with a 
touch of sarcasm. He didn't get too excited over my 
District 13 story. 

"What do you think they 11 do, Haymitch? To the 
districts that are rebelling?" I ask. 

"Well, you've heard what they did in Eight. You've 
seen what they did here, and that was without 
provocation," says Haymitch. "If things really do get 
out of hand, I think they'd have no problem killing off 
another district, same as they did Thirteen. Make an 
example of it, you know?" 

"So you think Thirteen was really destroyed? I mean, 
Bonnie and Twill were right about the footage of the 
mocking-jay," I say. 

"Okay, but what does that prove? Nothing, really. 
There are plenty of reasons they could be using old 
footage. Probably it looks more impressive. And it's a 
lot simpler, isn't it? To just press a few buttons in the 
editing room than to fly all the way out there and film 
it?" he says. "The idea that Thirteen has somehow 
rebounded and the Capitol is ignoring it? That sounds 
like the kind of rumor desperate people cling to." 

"I know. I was just hoping," I say. 



157 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Exactly. Because you're desperate," says Haymitch. 



I don't argue because, of course, he's right. 

Prim comes home from school bubbling over with 
excitement. The teachers announced there was 
mandatory programming tonight. "I think it's going to 
be your photo shoot!" 

"It can't be, Prim. They only did the pictures 
yesterday," I tell her. 

"Well, that's what somebody heard," she says. 

I'm hoping she's wrong. I haven't had time to prepare 
Gale for any of this. Since the whipping, I only see 
him when he comes to the house for my mother to 
check how he's healing. He's often scheduled seven 
days a week in the mine. In the few minutes of 
privacy we've had, with me walking him back to town, 
I gather that the rumblings of an uprising in 1 2 have 
been subdued by Thread's crackdown. He knows I'm 
not going to run. But he must also know that if we 
don't revolt in 12, I'm destined to be Peeta's bride. 
Seeing me lounging around in gorgeous gowns on his 
television... what can he do with that? 

When we gather around the television at seven-thirty, 
I discover that Prim is right. Sure enough, there's 
Caesar Flickerman, speaking before a standing-room- 
only crowd in front of the Training Center, talking to 
an appreciative crowd about my upcoming nuptials. 
He introduces Cinna, who became an overnight star 
with his costumes for me in the Games, and after a 
minute of good-natured chitchat, we're directed to 
turn our attention to a giant screen. 

I see now how they could photograph me yesterday 
and present the special tonight. Initially, Cinna 



158 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



designed two dozen wedding gowns. Since then, 
there's been the process of narrowing down the 
designs, creating the dresses, and choosing the 
accessories. Apparently, in the Capitol, there were 
opportunities to vote for your favorites at each stage. 
This is all culminating with shots of me in the final 
six dresses, which I'm sure took no time at all to 
insert in the show. Each shot is met with a huge 
reaction from the crowd. People screaming and 
cheering for their favorites, booing the ones they don't 
like. Having voted, and probably bet on the winner, 
people are very invested in my wedding gown. It's 
bizarre to watch when I think how I never even 
bothered to try one on before the cameras arrived. 
Caesar announces that interested parties must cast 
their final vote by noon on the following day. 

"Let's get Katniss Everdeen to her wedding in style!" 
he hollers to the crowd. I'm about to shut off the 
television, but then Caesar is telling us to stay tuned 
for the other big event of the evening. "That's right, 
this year will be the seventy-fifth anniversary of the 
Hunger Games, and that means it's time for our third 
Quarter Quell!" 

"What will they do?" asks Prim. "It isn't for months 
yet. 

We turn to our mother, whose expression is solemn 
and distant, as if she's remembering something. "It 
must be the reading of the card." 

The anthem plays, and my throat tightens with 
revulsion as President Snow takes the stage. He's 
followed by a young boy dressed in a white suit, 
holding a simple wooden box. The anthem ends, and 
President Snow begins to speak, to remind us all of 
the Dark Days from which the Hunger Games were 
born. When the laws for the Games were laid out, 



159 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



they dictated that every twenty-five years the 
anniversary would be marked by a Quarter Quell. It 
would call for a glorified version of the Games to make 
fresh the memory of those killed by the districts' 
rebellion. 

These words could not be more pointed, since I 
suspect several districts are rebelling right now. 

President Snow goes on to tell us what happened in 
the previous Quarter Quells. "On the twenty-fifth 
anniversary, as a reminder to the rebels that their 
children were dying because of their choice to initiate 
violence, every district was made to hold an election 
and vote on the tributes who would represent it." 

I wonder how that would have felt. Picking the kids 
who had to go. It is worse, I think, to be turned over 
by your own neighbors than have your name drawn 
from the reaping ball. 

"On the fiftieth anniversary," the president continues, 
"as a reminder that two rebels died for each Capitol 
citizen, every district was required to send twice as 
many tributes." 

I imagine facing a field of forty- seven instead of 
twenty-three. Worse odds, less hope, and ultimately 
more dead kids. That was the year Haymitch won... 

"I had a friend who went that year," says my mother 
quietly. "Maysilee Donner. Her parents owned the 
sweetshop. They gave me her songbird after. A 
canary." 

Prim and I exchange a look. It's the first we've ever 
heard of Maysilee Donner. Maybe because my mother 
knew we would want to know how she died. 



160 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"And now we honor our third Quarter Quell," says the 
president. The little boy in white steps forward, 
holding out the box as he opens the lid. We can see 
the tidy, upright rows of yellowed envelopes. Whoever 
devised the Quarter Quell system had prepared for 
centuries of Hunger Games. The president removes 
an envelope clearly marked with a 75. He runs his 
finger under the flap and pulls out a small square of 
paper. Without hesitation, he reads, "On the seventy- 
fifth anniversary, as a reminder to the rebels that 
even the strongest among them cannot overcome the 
power of the Capitol, the male and female tributes will 
be reaped from their existing pool of victors." 

My mother gives a faint shriek and Prim buries her 
face in her hands, but I feel more like the people I see 
in the crowd on television. Slightly baffled. What does 
it mean? Existing pool of victors? 

Then I get it, what it means. At least, for me. District 
12 only has three existing victors to choose from. Two 
male. One female... 

I am going back into the arena. 



161 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



My body reacts before my mind does and I'm running 
out the door, across the lawns of the Victor's Village, 
into the dark beyond. Moisture from the sodden 
ground soaks my socks and I'm aware of the sharp 
bite of the wind, but I don't stop. Where? Where to 
go? The woods, of course. I'm at the fence before the 
hum makes me remember how very trapped I am. I 
back away, panting, turn on my heel, and take off 
again. 

The next thing I know I'm on my hands and knees in 
the cellar of one of the empty houses in the Victor's 
Village. Faint shafts of moonlight come in through the 
window wells above my head. I'm cold and wet and 
winded, but my escape attempt has done nothing to 
subdue the hysteria rising up inside me. It will drown 
me unless it's released. I ball up the front of my shirt, 
stuff it into my mouth, and begin to scream. How long 
this continues, I don't know. But when I stop, my 
voice is almost gone. 

I curl up on my side and stare at the patches of 
moonlight on the cement floor. Back in the arena. 
Back in the place of nightmares. That's where I am 
going. I have to admit I didn't see it coming. I saw a 
multitude of other things. Being publicly humiliated, 
tortured, and executed. 

Fleeing through the wilderness, pursued by 
Peacekeepers and hovercraft. Marriage to Peeta with 
our children forced into the arena. But never that I 
myself would have to be a player in the Games again. 
Why? Because there's no precedent for it. Victors are 
out of the reaping for life. That's the deal if you win. 
Until now. 



162 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



There's some kind of sheeting, the kind they put 
down when they paint. I pull it over me like a blanket. 
In the distance, someone is calling my name. But at 
the moment, I excuse myself from thinking about 
even those I love most. I think only of me. And what 
lies ahead. 

The sheeting's stiff but holds warmth. My muscles 
relax, my heart rate slows. I see the wooden box in 
the little boy's hands, President Snow drawing out the 
yellowed envelope. Is it possible that this was really 
the Quarter Quell written down seventy-five years 
ago? It seems unlikely. It's just too perfect an answer 
for the troubles that face the Capitol today. Getting 
rid of me and subduing the districts all in one neat 
little package. 

I hear President Snow's voice in my head. "On the 
seventy-fifth anniversary, as a reminder to the rebels 
that even the strongest among them cannot overcome 
the power of the Capitol, the male and female tributes 
will be reaped from their existing pool of victors. 

Yes, victors are our strongest. They're the ones who 
survived the arena and slipped the noose of poverty 
that strangles the rest of us. They, or should I say we, 
are the very embodiment of hope where there is no 
hope. And now twenty-three of us will be killed to 
show how even that hope was an illusion. 

I'm glad I won only last year. Otherwise I'd know all 
the other victors, not just because I see them on 
television but because they're guests at every Games. 
Even if they're not mentoring like Haymitch always 
has to, most return to the Capitol each year for the 
event. I think a lot of them are friends. Whereas the 
only friend I'll have to worry about killing will be 
either Peeta or Haymitch. Peeta or Haymitch! 



163 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I sit straight up, throwing off the sheeting. What just 
went through my mind? There's no situation in which 
I would ever kill Peeta or Haymitch. But one of them 
will be in the arena with me, and that's a fact. They 
may have even decided between them who it will be. 
Whoever is picked first, the other will have the option 
of volunteering to take his place. I already know what 
will happen. Peeta will ask Haymitch to let him go 
into the arena with me no matter what. For my sake. 
To protect me. 

I stumble around the cellar, looking for an exit. How 
did I even get into this place? I feel my way up the 
steps to the kitchen and see the glass window in the 
door has been shattered. Must be why my hand 
seems to be bleeding. I hurry back into the night and 
head straight to Haymitch's house. He's sitting alone 
at the kitchen table, a half-emptied bottle of white 
liquor in one fist, his knife in the other. Drunk as a 
skunk. 

"Ah, there she is. All tuckered out. Finally did the 
math, did you, sweetheart? Worked out you won't be 
going in alone? And now you're here to ask me... 
what?" he says. 

I don't answer. The window's wide open and the wind 
cuts through me just as if I were outside. 

"I'll admit, it was easier for the boy. He was here 
before I could snap the seal on a bottle. Begging me 
for another chance to go in. But what can you say?" 
He mimics my voice. "Take his place, Haymitch, 
because all things being equal, I'd rather Peeta had a 
crack at the rest of his life than you?'" 

I bite my lip because once he's said it, I'm afraid 
that's what I do want. For Peeta to live, even if it 
means Haymitch's death. No, I don't. He's dreadful, of 
164 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



course, but Haymitch is my family now. What did I 
come for? I think. What could I possibly want here? 

"I came for a drink," I say. 

Haymitch bursts out laughing and slams the bottle 
on the table before me. I run my sleeve across the top 
and take a couple gulps before I come up choking. It 
takes a few minutes to compose myself, and even 
then my eyes and nose are still streaming. But inside 
me, the liquor feels like fire and I like it. 

"Maybe it should be you," I say matter-of-factly as I 
pull up a chair. "You hate life, anyway." 

"Very true," says Haymitch. "And since last time I 
tried to keep you alive... seems like I'm obligated to 
save the boy this time." 

"That's another good point," I say, wiping my nose 
and tipping up the bottle again. 

"Peeta's argument is that since I chose you, I now owe 
him. Anything he wants. And what he wants is the 
chance to go in again to protect you," says Haymitch. 

I knew it. In this way, Peeta's not hard to predict. 
While I was wallowing around on the floor of that 
cellar, thinking only of myself, he was here, thinking 
only of me. Shame isn't a strong enough word for 
what I feel. 

"You could live a hundred lifetimes and not deserve 
him, you know," Haymitch says. 

"Yeah, yeah," I say brusquely. "No question, he's the 
superior one in this trio. So, what are you going to 
do?" 



165 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"I don't know." Haymitch sighs. "Go back in with you 
maybe, if I can. If my name's drawn at the reaping, it 
won't matter. He'll just volunteer to take my place." 

We sit for a while in silence. "It'd be bad for you in the 
arena, wouldn't it? Knowing all the others?" I ask. 

"Oh, I think we can count on it being unbearable 
wherever I am." He nods at the bottle. "Can I have 
that back now?" 

"No," I say, wrapping my arms around it. Haymitch 
pulls another bottle out from under the table and 
gives the top a twist. But I realize I am not just here 
for a drink. There's something else I want from 
Haymitch. "Okay, I figured out what I'm asking," I 
say. "If it is Peeta and me in the Games, this time we 
try to keep him alive." 

Something flickers across his bloodshot eyes. Pain. 

"Like you said, it's going to be bad no matter how you 
slice it. And whatever Peeta wants, it's his turn to be 
saved. We both owe him that." My voice takes on a 
pleading tone. 

"Besides, the Capitol hates me so much, I'm as good 
as dead now. He still might have a chance. Please, 
Haymitch. Say you'll help me." 

He frowns at his bottle, weighing my words. "All 
right," he says finally. 

"Thanks," I say. I should go see Peeta now, but I don't 
want to. My head's spinning from the drink, and I'm 
so wiped out, who knows what he could get me to 
agree to? No, now I have to go home to face my 
mother and Prim. 



166 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



As I stagger up the steps to my house, the front door 
opens and Gale pulls me into his arms. "I was wrong. 
We should have gone when you said," he whispers. 

"No," I say. I'm having trouble focusing, and liquor 
keeps sloshing out of my bottle and down the back of 
Gale's jacket, but he doesn't seem to care. 

"It's not too late," he says. 

Over his shoulder, I see my mother and Prim 
clutching each other in the doorway. We run. They 
die. And now I've got Peeta to protect. End of 
discussion. "Yeah, it is." My knees give way and he's 
holding me up. As the alcohol overcomes my mind, I 
hear the glass bottle shatter on the floor. This seems 
appropriate since I have obviously lost my grip on 
everything. 

When I wake up, I barely get to the toilet before the 
white liquor makes its reappearance. It burns just as 
much coming up as it did going down, and tastes 
twice as bad. I'm trembling and sweaty when I finish 
vomiting, but at least most of the stuff is out of my 
system. Enough made it into my bloodstream, 
though, to result in a pounding headache, parched 
mouth, and boiling stomach. 

I turn on the shower and stand under the warm rain 
for a minute before I realize I'm still in my 
underclothes. My mother must have just stripped off 
my filthy outer ones and tucked me in bed. I throw 
the wet undergarments into the sink and pour 
shampoo on my head. My hands sting, and that's 
when I notice the stitches, small and even, across one 
palm and up the side of the other hand. Vaguely I 
remember breaking that glass window last night. I 
scrub myself from head to toe, only stopping to throw 



167 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



up again right in the shower. It's mostly just bile and 
goes down the drain with the sweet- smelling bubbles. 



Finally clean, I pull on my robe and head back to bed, 
ignoring my dripping hair. I climb under the blankets, 
sure this is what it must feel like to be poisoned. The 
footsteps on the stairs renew my panic from last 
night. I'm not ready to see my mother and Prim. I 
have to pull myself together to be calm and 
reassuring, the way I was when we said our good- 
byes the day of the last reaping. I have to be strong. I 
struggle into an upright position, push my wet hair 
off my throbbing temples, and brace myself for this 
meeting. They appear in the doorway, holding tea and 
toast, their faces filled with concern. I open my 
mouth, planning to start off with some kind of joke, 
and burst into tears. 

So much for being strong. 

My mother sits on the side of the bed and Prim crawls 
right up next to me and they hold me, making quiet 
soothing sounds, until I am mostly cried out. Then 
Prim gets a towel and dries my hair, combing out the 
knots, while my mother coaxes tea and toast into me. 
They dress me in warm pajamas and layer more 
blankets on me and I drift off again. 

I can tell by the light it's late afternoon when I come 
round again. There's a glass of water on my bedside 
table and I gulp it down thirstily. My stomach and 
head still feel rocky, but much better than they did 
earlier. I rise, dress, and braid back my hair. Before I 
go down, I pause at the top of the stairs, feeling 
slightly embarrassed about the way I've handled the 
news of the Quarter Quell. My erratic flight, drinking 
with Haymitch, weeping. Given the circumstances, I 
guess I deserve one day of indulgence. I'm glad the 
cameras weren't here for it, though. 



168 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Downstairs, my mother and Prim embrace me again, 
but they're not overly emotional. I know they're 
holding things in to make it easier on me. Looking at 
Prim's face, it's hard to imagine she's the same frail 
little girl I left behind on reaping day nine months 
ago. The combination of that ordeal and all that has 
followed — the cruelty in the district, the parade of sick 
and wounded that she often treats by herself now if 
my mother's hands are too full — these things have 
aged her years. She's grown quite a bit, too; we're 
practically the same height now, but that isn't what 
makes her seem so much older. 

My mother ladles out a mug of broth for me, and I ask 
for a second mug to take to Haymitch. Then I walk 
across the lawn to his house. He's only just waking 
up and accepts the mug without comment. We sit 
there, almost peacefully, sipping our broth and 
watching the sun set through his living room window. 
I hear someone walking around upstairs and I 
assume it's Hazelle, but a few minutes later Peeta 
comes down and tosses a cardboard box of empty 
liquor bottles on the table with finality. "There, it's 
done," he says. 

It's taking all of Haymitch's resources to focus his 
eyes on the bottles, so I speak up. "What's done?" 

"I've poured all the liquor down the drain," says Peeta. 

This seems to jolt Haymitch out of his stupor, and he 
paws through the box in disbelief. "You what?" 

"I tossed the lot," says Peeta. 

"He'll just buy more," I say. 

"No, he won't," says Peeta. "I tracked down Ripper 
this morning and told her I'd turn her in the second 



169 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



she sold to either of you. I paid her off, too, just for 
good measure, but I don't think she's eager to be back 
in the Peacekeepers' custody." 

Haymitch takes a swipe with his knife but Peeta 
deflects it so easily it's pathetic. Anger rises up in me. 
"What business is it of yours what he does?" 

"It's completely my business. However it falls out, two 
of us are going to be in the arena again with the other 
as mentor. We can't afford any drunkards on this 
team. Especially not you, Katniss," says Peeta to me. 

"What?" I sputter indignantly. It would be more 
convincing if I weren't still so hungover. "Last night's 
the only time I've ever even been drunk." 

"Yeah, and look at the shape you're in," says Peeta. 

I don't know what I expected from my first meeting 
with Peeta after the announcement. A few hugs and 
kisses. A little comfort maybe. Not this. I turn to 
Haymitch. "Don't worry, 111 get you more liquor." 

"Then 111 turn you both in. Let you sober up in the 
stocks," says Peeta. 

"What's the point to this?" asks Haymitch. 

"The point is that two of us are coming home from the 
Capitol. One mentor and one victor," says Peeta. 
"Effie's sending me recordings of all the living victors. 
We're going to watch their Games and learn 
everything we can about how they fight. We're going 
to put on weight and get strong. We're going to start 
acting like Careers. And one of us is going to be victor 
again whether you two like it or not!" He sweeps out 
of the room, slamming the front door. 



170 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Haymitch and I wince at the bang. 



"I don't like self-righteous people," I say. 

"What's to like?" says Haymitch, who begins sucking 
the dregs out of the empty bottles. 

"You and me. That's who he plans on coming home," I 
say. 

"Well, then the joke's on him," says Haymitch. 

But after a few days, we agree to act like Careers, 
because this is the best way to get Peeta ready as 
well. Every night we watch the old recaps of the 
Games that the remaining victors won. I realize we 
never met any of them on the Victory Tour, which 
seems odd in retrospect. When I bring it up, 
Haymitch says the last thing President Snow would've 
wanted was to show Peeta and me — especially me — 
bonding with other victors in potentially rebellious 
districts. Victors have a special status, and if they 
appeared to be supporting my defiance of the Capitol, 
it would've been dangerous politically. Adjusting for 
age, I realize some of our opponents may be elderly, 
which is both sad and reassuring. Peeta takes 
copious notes, Haymitch volunteers information 
about the victors' personalities, and slowly we begin 
to know our competition. 

Every morning we do exercises to strengthen our 
bodies. We run and lift things and stretch our 
muscles. Every afternoon we work on combat skills, 
throwing knives, fighting hand to hand; I even teach 
them to climb trees. Officially, tributes aren't 
supposed to train, but no one tries to stop us. Even in 
regular years, the tributes from Districts 1, 2, and 4 
show up able to wield spears and swords. This is 
nothing by comparison. 



171 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



After all the years of abuse, Haymitch's body resists 
improvement. He's still remarkably strong, but the 
shortest run winds him. And you'd think a guy who 
sleeps every night with a knife might actually be able 
to hit the side of a house with one, but his hands 
shake so badly it takes weeks for him to achieve even 
that. 

Peeta and I excel under the new regimen, though. It 
gives me something to do. It gives us all something to 
do besides accept defeat. My mother puts us on a 
special diet to gain weight. Prim treats our sore 
muscles. Madge sneaks us her father's Capitol 
newspapers. Predictions on who will be victor of the 
victors show us among the favorites. Even Gale steps 
into the picture on Sundays, although he's got no love 
for Peeta or Haymitch, and teaches us all he knows 
about snares. It's weird for me, being in conversations 
with both Peeta and Gale, but they seem to have set 
aside whatever issues they have about me. 

One night, as I'm walking Gale back into town, he 
even admits, "It'd be better if he were easier to hate." 

"Tell me about it," I say. "If I could Ve just hated him 
in the arena, we all wouldn't be in this mess now. 
He'd be dead, and I'd be a happy little victor all by 
myself." 

"And where would we be, Katniss?" asks Gale. 

I pause, not knowing what to say. Where would I be 
with my pretend cousin who wouldn't be my cousin if 
it weren't for Peeta? Would he have still kissed me 
and would I have kissed him back had I been free to 
do so? Would I have let myself open up to him, lulled 
by the security of money and food and the illusion of 
safety being a victor could bring under different 
circumstances? But there would still always be the 
172 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



reaping looming over us, over our children. No matter 
what I wanted... 



"Hunting. Like every Sunday," I say. I know he didn't 
mean the question literally, but this is as much as I 
can honestly give. Gale knows I chose him over Peeta 
when I didn't make a run for it. To me, there's no 
point in talking about things that might have been. 
Even if I had killed Peeta in the arena, I still wouldn't 
have wanted to marry anyone. I only got engaged to 
save people's lives, and that completely backfired. 

I'm afraid, anyway, that any kind of emotional scene 
with Gale might cause him to do something drastic. 
Like start that uprising in the mines. And as 
Haymitch says, District 12 isn't ready for that. If 
anything, they're less ready than before the Quarter 
Quell announcement, because the following morning 
another hundred Peacekeepers arrived on the train. 

Since I don't plan on making it back alive a second 
time, the sooner Gale lets me go, the better. I do plan 
on saying one or two things to him after the reaping, 
when we're allowed an hour for good-byes. To let Gale 
know how essential he's been to me all these years. 
How much better my life has been for knowing him. 
For loving him, even if it's only in the limited way that 
I can manage. 

But I never get the chance. 

The day of the reaping's hot and sultry. The 
population of District 12 waits, sweating and silent, in 
the square with machine guns trained on them. I 
stand alone in a small roped-off area with Peeta and 
Haymitch in a similar pen to the right of me. The 
reaping takes only a minute. Effie, shining in a wig of 
metallic gold, lacks her usual verve. She has to claw 
around the girls' reaping ball for quite a while to snag 



173 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



the one piece of paper that everyone already knows 
has my name on it. Then she catches Haymitch's 
name. He barely has time to shoot me an unhappy 
look before Peeta has volunteered to take his place. 

We are immediately marched into the Justice 
Building to find Head Peacekeeper Thread waiting for 
us. "New procedure," he says with a smile. We're 
ushered out the back door, into a car, and taken to 
the train station. There are no cameras on the 
platform, no crowd to send us on our way. Haymitch 
and Effie appear, escorted by guards. Peacekeepers 
hurry us all onto the train and slam the door. The 
wheels begin to turn. 

And I'm left staring out the window, watching District 
12 disappear, with all my good-byes still hanging on 
my lips. 



174 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I remain at the window long after the woods have 
swallowed up the last glimpse of my home. This time I 
don't have even the slightest hope of return. Before 
my first Games, I promised Prim I would do 
everything I could to win, and now I've sworn to 
myself to do all I can to keep Peeta alive. I will never 
reverse this journey again. 

I'd actually figured out what I wanted my last words 
to my loved ones to be. How best to close and lock the 
doors and leave them sad but safely behind. And now 
the Capitol has stolen that as well. 

"Well write letters, Katniss," says Peeta from behind 
me. "It will be better, anyway. Give them a piece of us 
to hold on to. Haymitch will deliver them for us if... 
they need to be delivered." 

I nod and go straight to my room. I sit on the bed, 
knowing I will never write those letters. They will be 
like the speech I tried to write to honor Rue and 
Thresh in District 1 1 . Things seemed clear in my 
head and even when I talked before the crowd, but 
the words never came out of the pen right. Besides, 
they were meant to go with embraces and kisses and 
a stroke of Prim's hair, a caress of Gale's face, a 
squeeze of Madge's hand. They cannot be delivered 
with a wooden box containing my cold, stiff body. 

Too heartsick to cry, all I want is to curl up on the 
bed and sleep until we arrive in the Capitol tomorrow 
morning. But I have a mission. No, it's more than a 
mission. It's my dying wish. Keep Peeta alive. And as 
unlikely as it seems that I can achieve it in the face of 
the Capitol's anger, it's important that I be at the top 
175 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



of my game. This won't happen if I'm mourning for 
everyone I love back home. Let them go, I tell myself. 
Say good-bye and forget them. I do my best, thinking 
of them one by one, releasing them like birds from the 
protective cages inside me, locking the doors against 
their return. 

By the time Effie knocks on my door to call me to 
dinner, I'm empty. But the lightness isn't entirely 
unwelcome. 

The meal's subdued. So subdued, in fact, that there 
are long periods of silence relieved only by the 
removal of old dishes and presentation of new ones. A 
cold soup of pureed vegetables. Fish cakes with 
creamy lime paste. Those little birds filled with orange 
sauce, with wild rice and watercress. Chocolate 
custard dotted with cherries. 

Peeta and Effie make occasional attempts at 
conversation that quickly die out. 

"I love your new hair, Effie," Peeta says. 

"Thank you. I had it especially done to match 
Katniss's pin. I was thinking we might get you a 
golden ankle band and maybe find Haymitch a gold 
bracelet or something so we could all look like a 
team," says Effie. 

Evidently, Effie doesn't know that my mockingjay pin 
is now a symbol used by the rebels. At least in 
District 8. In the Capitol, the mockingjay is still a fun 
reminder of an especially exciting Hunger Games. 
What else could it be? Real rebels don't put a secret 
symbol on something as durable as jewelry. They put 
it on a wafer of bread that can be eaten in a second if 
necessary. 



176 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"I think that's a great idea," says Peeta. "How about it, 
Haymitch?" 

"Yeah, whatever," says Haymitch. He's not drinking 
but I can tell he'd like to be. Effie had them take her 
own wine away when she saw the effort he was 
making, but he's in a miserable state. If he were the 
tribute, he would have owed Peeta nothing and could 
be as drunk as he liked. Now it's going to take all he's 
got to keep Peeta alive in an arena full of his old 
friends, and hell probably fail. 

"Maybe we could get you a wig, too," I say in an 
attempt at lightness. He just shoots me a look that 
says to leave him alone, and we all eat our custard in 
silence. 

"Shall we watch the recap of the reapings?" says Effie, 
dabbing at the corners of her mouth with a white 
linen napkin. 

Peeta goes off to retrieve his notebook on the 
remaining living victors, and we gather in the 
compartment with the television to see who our 
competition will be in the arena. We are all in place as 
the anthem begins to play and the annual recap of 
the reaping ceremonies in the twelve districts begins. 

In the history of the Games, there have been seventy- 
five victors. Fifty-nine are still alive. I recognize many 
of their faces, either from seeing them as tributes or 
mentors at previous Games or from our recent 
viewing of the victors' tapes. Some are so old or 
wasted by illness, drugs, or drink that I can't place 
them. As one would expect, the pools of Career 
tributes from Districts 1, 2, and 4 are the largest. But 
every district has managed to scrape up at least one 
female and one male victor. 



177 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



The reapings go by quickly. Peeta studiously puts 
stars by the names of the chosen tributes in his 
notebook. Haymitch watches, his face devoid of 
emotion, as friends of his step up to take the stage. 
Effie makes hushed, distressed comments like "Oh, 
not Cecelia" or "Well, Chaff never could stay out of a 
fight," and sighs frequently. 

For my part, I try to make some mental record of the 
other tributes, but like last year, only a few really 
stick in my head. There's the classically beautiful 
brother and sister from District 1 who were victors in 
consecutive years when I was little. Brutus, a 
volunteer from District 2, who must be at least forty 
and apparently can't wait to get back in the arena. 
Finnick, the handsome bronze-haired guy from 
District 4 who was crowned ten years ago at the age 
of fourteen. A hysterical young woman with flowing 
brown hair is also called from 4, but she's quickly 
replaced by a volunteer, an eighty-year-old woman 
who needs a cane to walk to the stage. Then there's 
Johanna Mason, the only living female victor from 7, 
who won a few years back by pretending she was a 
weakling. The woman from 8 who Effie calls Cecelia, 
who looks about thirty, has to detach herself from the 
three kids who run up to cling to her. Chaff, a man 
from 1 1 who I know to be one of Haymitch 's 
particular friends, is also in. 

I'm called. Then Haymitch. And Peeta volunteers. One 
of the announcers actually gets teary because it 
seems the odds will never be in our favor, we star- 
crossed lovers of District 12. Then she pulls herself 
together to say she bets that "these will be the best 
Games ever!" 

Haymitch leaves the compartment without a word, 
and Effie, after making a few unconnected comments 
about this tribute or that, bids us good night. I just 
178 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



sit there watching Peeta rip out the pages of the 
victors who were not picked. 



"Why don't you get some sleep?" he says. 

Because I can't handle the nightmares. Not without 
you, I think. They are sure to be dreadful tonight. But 
I can hardly ask Peeta to come sleep with me. We've 
barely touched since that night Gale was whipped. 
"What are you going to do?" I ask. 

"Just review my notes awhile. Get a clear picture of 
what we're up against. But 111 go over it with you in 
the morning. Go to bed, Katniss," he says. 

So I go to bed and, sure enough, within a few hours I 
awake from a nightmare where that old woman from 
District 4 transforms into a large rodent and gnaws 
on my face. I know I was screaming, but no one 
comes. Not Peeta, not even one of the Capitol 
attendants. I pull on a robe to try to calm the 
gooseflesh crawling over my body. Staying in my 
compartment is impossible, so I decide to go find 
someone to make me tea or hot chocolate or anything. 
Maybe Haymitch is still up. Surely he isn't asleep. 

I order warm milk, the most calming thing I can think 
of, from an attendant. Hearing voices from the 
television room, I go in and find Peeta. Beside him on 
the couch is the box Effie sent of tapes of the old 
Hunger Games. I recognize the episode in which 
Brutus became victor. 

Peeta rises and flips off the tape when he sees me. 
"Couldn't sleep?" 

"Not for long," I say. I pull the robe more securely 
around me as I remember the old woman 
transforming into the rodent. 



179 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Want to talk about it?" he asks. Sometimes that can 
help, but I just shake my head, feeling weak that 
people I haven't even fought yet already haunt me. 

When Peeta holds out his arms, I walk straight into 
them. It's the first time since they announced the 
Quarter Quell that he's offered me any sort of 
affection. He's been more like a very demanding 
trainer, always pushing, always insisting Haymitch 
and I run faster, eat more, know our enemy better. 
Lover? Forget about that. He abandoned any pretense 
of even being my friend. I wrap my arms tightly 
around his neck before he can order me to do push- 
ups or something. Instead he pulls me in close and 
buries his face in my hair. Warmth radiates from the 
spot where his lips just touch my neck, slowly 
spreading through the rest of me. It feels so good, so 
impossibly good, that I know I will not be the first to 
let go. 

And why should I? I have said good-bye to Gale. I'll 
never see him again, that's for certain. Nothing I do 
now can hurt him. He won't see it or hell think I am 
acting for the cameras. That, at least, is one weight off 
my shoulders. 

The arrival of the Capitol attendant with the warm 
milk is what breaks us apart. He sets a tray with a 
steaming ceramic jug and two mugs on a table. "I 
brought an extra cup," he says. 

"Thanks," I say. 

"And I added a touch of honey to the milk. For 
sweetness. And just a pinch of spice," he adds. He 
looks at us like he wants to say more, then gives his 
head a slight shake and backs out of the room. 

"What's with him?" I say. 

180 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"I think he feels bad for us," says Peeta. 
"Right," I say, pouring the milk. 

"I mean it. I don't think the people in the Capitol are 
going to be all that happy about our going back in," 
says Peeta. "Or the other victors. They get attached to 
their champions." 

"I'm guessing they'll get over it once the blood starts 
flowing," I say flatly. Really, if there's one thing I don't 
have time for, it's worrying about how the Quarter 
Quell will affect the mood in the Capitol. "So, you're 
watching all the tapes again?" 

"Not really. Just sort of skipping around to see 
people's different fighting techniques," says Peeta. 
"Who's next?" I ask. 

"You pick," says Peeta, holding out the box. 

The tapes are marked with the year of the Games and 
the name of the victor. I dig around and suddenly find 
one in my hand that we have not watched. The year of 
the Games is fifty. That would make it the second 
Quarter Quell. And the name of the victor is Haymitch 
Abernathy. 

"We never watched this one," I say. 

Peeta shakes his head. "No. I knew Haymitch didn't 
want to. The same way we didn't want to relive our 
own Games. And since we're all on the same team, I 
didn't think it mattered much." 

"Is the person who won in twenty-five in here?" I ask. 

"I don't think so. Whoever it was must be dead by 
now, and Effie only sent me victors we might have to 



181 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



face." Peeta weighs Haymitch's tape in his hand. 
"Why? You think we ought to watch it?" 



"It's the only Quell we have. We might pick up 
something valuable about how they work," I say. But I 
feel weird. It seems like some major invasion of 
Haymitch's privacy. I don't know why it should, since 
the whole thing was public. But it does. I have to 
admit I'm also extremely curious. "We don't have to 
tell Haymitch we saw it." 

"Okay," Peeta agrees. He puts in the tape and I curl 
up next to him on the couch with my milk, which is 
really delicious with the honey and spices, and lose 
myself in the Fiftieth Hunger Games. After the 
anthem, they show President Snow drawing the 
envelope for the second Quarter Quell. He looks 
younger but just as repellent. He reads from the 
square of paper in the same onerous voice he used for 
ours, informing Panem that in honor of the Quarter 
Quell, there will be twice the number of tributes. The 
editors smash cut right into the reapings, where 
name after name after name is called. 

By the time we get to District 12, I'm completely 
overwhelmed by the sheer number of kids going to 
certain death. There's a woman, not Effie, calling the 
names in 12, but she still begins with "Ladies first!" 
She calls out the name of a girl who's from the Seam, 
you can tell by the look of her, and then I hear the 
name "Maysilee Donner." 

"Oh!" I say. "She was my mother's friend." The camera 
finds her in the crowd, clinging to two other girls. All 
blond. All definitely merchants' kids. 

"I think that's your mother hugging her," says Peeta 
quietly. And he's right. As Maysilee Donner bravely 
disengages herself and heads for the stage, I catch a 



182 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



glimpse of my mother at my age, and no one has 
exaggerated her beauty. Holding her hand and 
weeping is another girl who looks just like Maysilee. 
But a lot like someone else I know, too. 

"Madge," I say. 

"That's her mother. She and Maysilee were twins or 
something," Peeta says. "My dad mentioned it once." 

I think of Madge's mother. Mayor Undersee's wife. 
Who spends half her life in bed immobilized with 
terrible pain, shutting out the world. I think of how I 
never realized that she and my mother shared this 
connection. Of Madge showing up in that snowstorm 
to bring the painkiller for Gale. Of my mockingjay pin 
and how it means something completely different now 
that I know that its former owner was Madge's aunt, 
Maysilee Donner, a tribute who was murdered in the 
arena. 

Haymitch's name is called last of all. It's more of a 
shock to see him than my mother. Young. Strong. 
Hard to admit, but he was something of a looker. His 
hair dark and curly, those gray Seam eyes bright and, 
even then, dangerous. 

"Oh. Peeta, you don't think he killed Maysilee, do 
you?" I burst out. I don't know why, but I can't stand 
the thought. 

"With forty-eight players? I'd say the odds are against 
it," says Peeta. 

The chariot rides — in which the District 12 kids are 
dressed in awful coal miners' outfits — and the 
interviews flash by. There's little time to focus on 
anyone. But since Haymitch is going to be the victor, 
we get to see one full exchange between him and 



183 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Caesar Flickerman, who looks exactly as he always 
does in his twinkling midnight blue suit. Only his 
dark green hair, eyelids, and lips are different. 

"So, Haymitch, what do you think of the Games 
having one hundred percent more competitors than 
usual?" asks Caesar. 

Haymitch shrugs. "I don't see that it makes much 
difference. They 11 still be one hundred percent as 
stupid as usual, so I figure my odds will be roughly 
the same." 

The audience bursts out laughing and Haymitch gives 
them a half smile. Snarky. Arrogant. Indifferent. 

"He didn't have to reach far for that, did he?" I say. 

Now it's the morning the Games begin. We watch 
from the point of view of one of the tributes as she 
rises up through the tube from the Launch Room and 
into the arena. I can't help but give a slight gasp. 
Disbelief is reflected on the faces of the players. Even 
Haymitch's eyebrows lift in pleasure, although they 
almost immediately knit themselves back into a 
scowl. 

It's the most breathtaking place imaginable. The 
golden Cornucopia sits in the middle of a green 
meadow with patches of gorgeous flowers. The sky is 
azure blue with puffy white clouds. Bright songbirds 
flutter overhead. By the way some of the tributes are 
sniffing, it must smell fantastic. An aerial shot shows 
that the meadow stretches for miles. Far in the 
distance, in one direction, there seems to be a woods, 
in the other, a snowcapped mountain. 

The beauty disorients many of the players, because 
when the gong sounds, most of them seem like they're 



184 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



trying to wake from a dream. Not Haymitch, though. 
He's at the Cornucopia, armed with weapons and a 
backpack of choice supplies. He heads for the woods 
before most of the others have stepped off their 
plates. 

Eighteen tributes are killed in the bloodbath that first 
day. Others begin to die off and it becomes clear that 
almost everything in this pretty place — the luscious 
fruit dangling from the bushes, the water in the 
crystalline streams, even the scent of the flowers 
when inhaled too directly — is deadly poisonous. Only 
the rainwater and the food provided at the 
Cornucopia are safe to consume. There's also a large, 
well-stocked Career pack of ten tributes scouring the 
mountain area for victims. 

Haymitch has his own troubles over in the woods, 
where the fluffy golden squirrels turn out to be 
carnivorous and attack in packs, and the butterfly 
stings bring agony if not death. But he persists in 
moving forward, always keeping the distant mountain 
at his back. 

Maysilee Donner turns out to be pretty resourceful 
herself, for a girl who leaves the Cornucopia with only 
a small backpack. Inside she finds a bowl, some dried 
beef, and a blowgun with two dozen darts. Making 
use of the readily available poisons, she soon turns 
the blowgun into a deadly weapon by dipping the 
darts in lethal substances and directing them into her 
opponents' flesh. 

Four days in, the picturesque mountain erupts in a 
volcano that wipes out another dozen players, 
including all but five of the Career pack. With the 
mountain spewing liquid fire, and the meadow 
offering no means of concealment, the remaining 
thirteen tributes — including Haymitch and Maysilee — 

185 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



have no choice but to confine themselves to the 
woods. 



Haymitch seems bent on continuing in the same 
direction, away from the now volcanic mountain, but 
a maze of tightly woven hedges forces him to circle 
back into the center of the woods, where he 
encounters three of the Careers and pulls his knife. 
They may be much bigger and stronger, but Haymitch 
has remarkable speed and has killed two when the 
third disarms him. That Career is about to slit his 
throat when a dart drops him to the ground. 

Maysilee Donner steps out of the woods. "We'd live 
longer with two of us." 

"Guess you just proved that," says Haymitch, rubbing 
his neck. "Allies?" Maysilee nods. And there they are, 
instantly drawn into one of those pacts you'd be hard- 
pressed to break if you ever expect to go home and 
face your district. 

Just like Peeta and me, they do better together. Get 
more rest, work out a system to salvage more 
rainwater, fight as a team, and share the food from 
the dead tributes' packs. But Haymitch is still 
determined to keep moving on. 

"Why?" Maysilee keeps asking, and he ignores her 
until she refuses to move any farther without an 
answer. 

"Because it has to end somewhere, right?" says 
Haymitch. "The arena can't go on forever." 

"What do you expect to find?" Maysilee asks. 

"I don't know. But maybe there's something we can 
use," he says. 



186 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



When they finally do make it through that impossible 
hedge, using a blowtorch from one of the dead 
Careers' packs, they find themselves on flat, dry earth 
that leads to a cliff. Far below, you can see jagged 
rocks. 

"That's all there is, Haymitch. Let's go back," says 
Maysilee. 

"No, I'm staying here," he says. 

"All right. There's only five of us left. May as well say 
good-bye now, anyway," she says. "I don't want it to 
come down to you and me." 

"Okay," he agrees. That's all. He doesn't offer to shake 
her hand or even look at her. And she walks away. 

Haymitch skirts along the edge of the cliff as if trying 
to figure something out. His foot dislodges a pebble 
and it falls into the abyss, apparently gone forever. 
But a minute later, as he sits to rest, the pebble 
shoots back up beside him. Haymitch stares at it, 
puzzled, and then his face takes on a strange 
intensity. He lobs a rock the size of his fist over the 
cliff and waits. When it flies back out and right into 
his hand, he starts laughing. 

That's when we hear Maysilee begin to scream. The 
alliance is over and she broke it off, so no one could 
blame him for ignoring her. But Haymitch runs for 
her, anyway. He arrives only in time to watch the last 
of a flock of candy pink birds, equipped with long, 
thin beaks, skewer her through the neck. He holds 
her hand while she dies, and all I can think of is Rue 
and how I was too late to save her, too. 

Later that day, another tribute is killed in combat and 
a third gets eaten by a pack of those fluffy squirrels, 
187 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



leaving Haymitch and a girl from District 1 to vie for 
the crown. She's bigger than he is and just as fast, 
and when the inevitable fight comes, it's bloody and 
awful and both have received what could well be fatal 
wounds, when Haymitch is finally disarmed. He 
staggers through the beautiful woods, holding his 
intestines in, while she stumbles after him, carrying 
the ax that should deliver his deathblow. Haymitch 
makes a beeline for his cliff and has just reached the 
edge when she throws the ax. He collapses on the 
ground and it flies into the abyss. Now weaponless as 
well, the girl just stands there, trying to staunch the 
flow of blood pouring from her empty eye socket. 
She's thinking perhaps that she can outlast 
Haymitch, who's starting to convulse on the ground. 
But what she doesn't know, and what he does, is that 
the ax will return. And when it flies back over the 
ledge, it buries itself in her head. The cannon sounds, 
her body is removed, and the trumpets blow to 
announce Haymitch 's victory. 

Peeta clicks off the tape and we sit there in silence for 
a while. 

Finally Peeta says, "That force field at the bottom of 
the cliff, it was like the one on the roof of the Training 
Center. The one that throws you back if you try to 
jump off and commit suicide. Haymitch found a way 
to turn it into a weapon." 

"Not just against the other tributes, but the Capitol, 
too," I say. "You know they didn't expect that to 
happen. It wasn't meant to be part of the arena. They 
never planned on anyone using it as a weapon. It 
made them look stupid that he figured it out. I bet 
they had a good time trying to spin that one. Bet 
that's why I don't remember seeing it on television. 
It's almost as bad as us and the berries!" 



188 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I can't help laughing, really laughing, for the first time 
in months. Peeta just shakes his head like I've lost my 
mind — and maybe I have, a little. 

"Almost, but not quite," says Haymitch from behind 
us. I whip around, afraid he's going to be angry over 
us watching his tape, but he just smirks and takes a 
swig from a bottle of wine. So much for sobriety. I 
guess I should be upset he's drinking again, but I'm 
preoccupied with another feeling. 

I've spent all these weeks getting to know who my 
competitors are, without even thinking about who my 
teammates are. Now a new kind of confidence is 
lighting up inside of me, because I think I finally 
know who Haymitch is. And I'm beginning to know 
who I am. And surely, two people who have caused 
the Capitol so much trouble can think of a way to get 
Peeta home alive. 



189 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Having been through prep with Flavius, Venia, and 
Octavia numerous times, it should just be an old 
routine to survive. But I haven't anticipated the 
emotional ordeal that awaits me. At some point 
during the prep, each of them bursts into tears at 
least twice, and Octavia pretty much keeps up a 
running whimper throughout the morning. It turns 
out they really have become attached to me, and the 
idea of my returning to the arena has undone them. 
Combine that with the fact that by losing me they'll 
be losing their ticket to all kinds of big social events, 
particularly my wedding, and the whole thing 
becomes unbearable. The idea of being strong for 
someone else having never entered their heads, I find 
myself in the position of having to console them. 
Since I'm the person going in to be slaughtered, this 
is somewhat annoying. 

It's interesting, though, when I think of what Peeta 
said about the attendant on the train being unhappy 
about the victors having to fight again. About people 
in the Capitol not liking it. I still think all of that will 
be forgotten once the gong sounds, but it's something 
of a revelation that those in the Capitol feel anything 
at all about us. They certainly don't have a problem 
watching children murdered every year. But maybe 
they know too much about the victors, especially the 
ones who've been celebrities for ages, to forget we're 
human beings. It's more like watching your own 
friends die. More like the Games are for those of us in 
the districts. 

By the time Cinna shows up, I am irritable and 
exhausted from comforting the prep team, especially 
because their constant tears are reminding me of the 
190 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



ones undoubtedly being shed at home. Standing there 
in my thin robe with my stinging skin and heart, I 
know I can't bear even one more look of regret. So the 
moment he walks in the door I snap, "I swear if you 
cry, 111 kill you here and now." 

Cinna just smiles. "Had a damp morning?" 

"You could wring me out," I reply. 

Cinna puts his arm around my shoulder and leads 
me into lunch. "Don't worry. I always channel my 
emotions into my work. That way I don't hurt anyone 
but myself." 

"I can't go through that again," I warn him. 

"I know. Ill talk to them," says Cinna. 

Lunch makes me feel a bit better. Pheasant with a 
selection of jewel-colored jellies, and tiny versions of 
real vegetables swimming in butter, and potatoes 
mashed with parsley. For dessert we dip chunks of 
fruit in a pot of melted chocolate, and Cinna has to 
order a second pot because I start just eating the stuff 
with a spoon. 

"So, what are we wearing for the opening 
ceremonies?" I finally ask as I scrape the second pot 
clean. "Headlamps or fire?" I know the chariot ride 
will require Peeta and me to be dressed in something 
coal related. 

"Something along that line," he says. 

When it's time to get in costume for the opening 
ceremonies, my prep team shows up but Cinna sends 
them away, saying they've done such a spectacular 
job in the morning, there's nothing left to do. They go 
191 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



off to recover, thankfully leaving me in Cinna's hands. 
He puts up my hair first, in the braided style my 
mother introduced him to, then proceeds with my 
makeup. Last year he used little so that the audience 
would recognize me when I landed in the arena. But 
now my face is almost obscured by the dramatic 
highlights and dark shadows. High arching eyebrows, 
sharp cheekbones, smoldering eyes, deep purple lips. 
The costume looks deceptively simple at first, just a 
fitted black jumpsuit that covers me from the neck 
down. He places a half crown like the one I received 
as victor on my head, but it's made of a heavy black 
metal, not gold. Then he adjusts the light in the room 
to mimic twilight and presses a button just inside the 
fabric on my wrist. I look down, fascinated, as my 
ensemble slowly comes to life, first with a soft golden 
light but gradually transforming to the orange-red of 
burning coal. I look as if I have been coated in glowing 
embers — no, that I am a glowing ember straight from 
our fireplace. The colors rise and fall, shift and blend, 
in exactly the way the coals do. 

"How did you do this?" I say in wonder. 

"Portia and I spent a lot of hours watching fires," says 
Cinna. "Now look at yourself." 

He turns me toward a mirror so that I can take in the 
entire effect. I do not see a girl, or even a woman, but 
some unearthly being who looks like she might make 
her home in the volcano that destroyed so many in 
Haymitch's Quell. The black crown, which now 
appears red-hot, casts strange shadows on my 
dramatically made-up face. Katniss, the girl on fire, 
has left behind her flickering flames and bejeweled 
gowns and soft candlelight frocks. She is as deadly as 
fire itself. 



192 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"I think. . . this is just what I needed to face the 
others," I say. 

"Yes, I think your days of pink lipstick and ribbons 
are behind you," says Cinna. He touches the button 
on my wrist again, extinguishing my light. "Let's not 
run down your power pack. When you're on the 
chariot this time, no waving, no smiling. I just want 
you to look straight ahead, as if the entire audience is 
beneath your notice." 

"Finally something I'll be good at," I say. 

Cinna has a few more things to attend to, so I decide 
to head down to the ground floor of the Remake 
Center, which houses the huge gathering place for the 
tributes and their chariots before the opening 
ceremonies. I'm hoping to find Peeta and Haymitch, 
but they haven't arrived yet. Unlike last year, when all 
the tributes were practically glued to their chariots, 
the scene is very social. The victors, both this year's 
tributes and their mentors, are standing around in 
small groups, talking. Of course, they all know one 
another and I don't know anyone, and I'm not really 
the sort of person to go around introducing myself. So 
I just stroke the neck of one of my horses and try not 
to be noticed. It doesn't work. 

The crunching hits my ear before I even know he's 
beside me, and when I turn my head, Finnick Odair's 
famous sea green eyes are only inches from mine. He 
pops a sugar cube in his mouth and leans against my 
horse. 

"Hello, Katniss," he says, as if we've known each other 
for years, when in fact we've never met. 



193 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Hello, Finnick," I say, just as casually, although I'm 
feeling uncomfortable at his closeness, especially 
since he's got so much bare skin exposed. 

"Want a sugar cube?" he says, offering his hand, 
which is piled high. "They're supposed to be for the 
horses, but who cares? They've got years to eat sugar, 
whereas you and I... well, if we see something sweet, 
we better grab it quick." 

Finnick Odair is something of a living legend in 
Panem. Since he won the Sixty-fifth Hunger Games 
when he was only fourteen, he's still one of the 
youngest victors. Being from District 4, he was a 
Career, so the odds were already in his favor, but 
what no trainer could claim to have given him was his 
extraordinary beauty. Tall, athletic, with golden skin 
and bronze-colored hair and those incredible eyes. 
While other tributes that year were hard-pressed to 
get a handful of grain or some matches for a gift, 
Finnick never wanted for anything, not food or 
medicine or weapons. It took about a week for his 
competitors to realize that he was the one to kill, but 
it was too late. He was already a good fighter with the 
spears and knives he had found in the Cornucopia. 
When he received a silver parachute with a trident — 
which may be the most expensive gift I've ever seen 
given in the arena — it was all over. District 4's 
industry is fishing. He'd been on boats his whole life. 
The trident was a natural, deadly extension of his 
arm. He wove a net out of some kind of vine he found, 
used it to entangle his opponents so he could spear 
them with the trident, and within a matter of days the 
crown was his. 

The citizens of the Capitol have been drooling over 
him ever since. 



194 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Because of his youth, they couldn't really touch him 
for the first year or two. But ever since he turned 
sixteen, he's spent his time at the Games being 
dogged by those desperately in love with him. No one 
retains his favor for long. He can go through four or 
five in his annual visit. Old or young, lovely or plain, 
rich or very rich, he'll keep them company and take 
their extravagant gifts, but he never stays, and once 
he's gone he never comes back. 

I can't argue that Finnick isn't one of the most 
stunning, sensuous people on the planet. But I can 
honestly say he's never been attractive to me. Maybe 
he's too pretty, or maybe he's too easy to get, or 
maybe it's really that he'd just be too easy to lose. 

"No, thanks," I say to the sugar. "I'd love to borrow 
your outfit sometime, though." 

He's draped in a golden net that's strategically 
knotted at his groin so that he can't technically be 
called naked, but he's about as close as you can get. 
I'm sure his stylist thinks the more of Finnick the 
audience sees, the better. 

"You're absolutely terrifying me in that getup. What 
happened to the pretty little-girl dresses?" he asks. He 
wets his lips just ever so slightly with his tongue. 
Probably this drives most people crazy. But for some 
reason all I can think of is old Cray, salivating over 
some poor, starving young woman. 

"I outgrew them," I say. 

Finnick takes the collar of my outfit and runs it 
between his fingers. "It's too bad about this Quell 
thing. You could have made out like a bandit in the 
Capitol. Jewels, money, anything you wanted." 



195 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"I don't like jewels, and I have more money than I 
need. What do you spend all yours on, anyway, 
Finnick?" I say. 

"Oh, I haven't dealt in anything as common as money 
for years," says Finnick. 

"Then how do they pay you for the pleasure of your 
company?" I ask. 

"With secrets," he says softly. He tips his head in so 
his lips are almost in contact with mine. "What about 
you, girl on fire? Do you have any secrets worth my 
time?" 

For some stupid reason, I blush, but I force myself to 
hold my ground. "No, I'm an open book," I whisper 
back. "Everybody seems to know my secrets before I 
know them myself." 

He smiles. "Unfortunately, I think that's true." His 
eyes flicker off to the side. "Peeta is coming. Sorry you 
have to cancel your wedding. I know how devastating 
that must be for you." He tosses another sugar cube 
in his mouth and saunters off. 

Peeta's beside me, dressed in an outfit identical to 
mine. "What did Finnick Odair want?" he asks. 

I turn and put my lips close to Peeta's and drop my 
eyelids in imitation of Finnick. "He offered me sugar 
and wanted to know all my secrets," I say in my best 
seductive voice. 

Peeta laughs. "Ugh. Not really." 

"Really," I say. "I'll tell you more when my skin stops 
crawling." 



196 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Do you think we'd have ended up like this if only one 
of us had won?" he asks, glancing around at the other 
victors. "Just another part of the freak show?" 

"Sure. Especially you," I say. 

"Oh. And why especially me?" he says with a smile. 

"Because you have a weakness for beautiful things 
and I don't," I say with an air of superiority. "They 
would lure you into their Capitol ways and you'd be 
lost entirely." 

"Having an eye for beauty isn't the same thing as a 
weakness," Peeta points out. "Except possibly when it 
comes to you." The music is beginning and I see the 
wide doors opening for the first chariot, hear the roar 
of the crowd. "Shall we?" He holds out a hand to help 
me into the chariot. 

I climb up and pull him up after me. "Hold still," I 
say, and straighten his crown. "Have you seen your 
suit turned on? We're going to be fabulous again." 

"Absolutely. But Portia says we're to be very above it 
all. No waving or anything," he says. "Where are they, 
anyway?" 

"I don't know." I eye the procession of chariots. 
"Maybe we better go ahead and switch ourselves on." 
We do, and as we begin to glow, I can see people 
pointing at us and chattering, and I know that, once 
again, we'll be the talk of the opening ceremonies. 
We're almost at the door. I crane my head around, 
but neither Portia nor Cinna, who were with us right 
up to the final second last year, are anywhere in 
sight. "Are we supposed to hold hands this year?" I 
ask. 



197 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"I guess they've left it up to us," says Peeta. 



I look up into those blue eyes that no amount of 
dramatic makeup can make truly deadly and 
remember how, just a year ago, I was prepared to kill 
him. Convinced he was trying to kill me. Now 
everything is reversed. I'm determined to keep him 
alive, knowing the cost will be my own life, but the 
part of me that is not so brave as I could wish is glad 
that it's Peeta, not Haymitch, beside me. Our hands 
find each other without further discussion. Of course 
we will go into this as one. 

The voice of the crowd rises into one universal scream 
as we roll into the fading evening light, but neither 
one of us reacts. I simply fix my eyes on a point far in 
the distance and pretend there is no audience, no 
hysteria. I can't help catching glimpses of us on the 
huge screens along the route, and we are not just 
beautiful, we are dark and powerful. No, more. We 
star-crossed lovers from District 12, who suffered so 
much and enjoyed so little the rewards of our victory, 
do not seek the fans' favor, grace them with our 
smiles, or catch their kisses. We are unforgiving. 

And I love it. Getting to be myself at last. 

As we curve around into the loop of the City Circle, I 
can see that a couple of the other stylists have tried to 
steal Cinna and Portia's idea of illuminating their 
tributes. The electric-light-studded outfits from 
District 3, where they make electronics, at least make 
sense. But what are the livestock keepers from 
District 10, who are dressed as cows, doing with 
flaming belts? Broiling themselves? Pathetic. 

Peeta and I, on the other hand, are so mesmerizing 
with our ever-changing coal costumes that most of 
the other tributes are staring at us. We seem 



198 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



particularly riveting to the pair from District 6, who 
are known morphling addicts. Both bone thin, with 
sagging yellowish skin. They can't tear their overlarge 
eyes away, even when President Snow begins to speak 
from his balcony, welcoming us all to the Quell. The 
anthem plays, and as we make our final trip around 
the circle, am I wrong? Or do I see the president 
fixated on me as well? 

Peeta and I wait until the doors of the Training Center 
have closed behind us to relax. Cinna and Portia are 
there, pleased with our performance, and Haymitch 
has made an appearance this year as well, only he's 
not at our chariot, he's over with the tributes of 
District 1 1 . I see him nod in our direction and then 
they follow him over to greet us. 

I know Chaff by sight because I've spent years 
watching him pass a bottle back and forth with 
Haymitch on television. He's dark skinned, about six 
feet tall, and one of his arms ends in a stump because 
he lost his hand in the Games he won thirty years 
ago. I'm sure they offered him some artificial 
replacement, like they did Peeta when they had to 
amputate his lower leg, but I guess he didn't take it. 

The woman, Seeder, looks almost like she could be 
from the Seam, with her olive skin and straight black 
hair streaked with silver. Only her golden brown eyes 
mark her as from another district. She must be 
around sixty, but she still looks strong, and there's no 
sign she's turned to liquor or morphling or any other 
chemical form of escape over the years. Before either 
of us says a word, she embraces me. I know somehow 
it must be because of Rue and Thresh. Before I can 
stop myself, I whisper, "The families?" 

"They're alive," she says back softly before letting me 
go- 

199 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Chaff throws his good arm around me and gives me a 
big kiss right on the mouth. I jerk back, startled, 
while he and Haymitch guffaw. 

That's about all the time we get before the Capitol 
attendants are firmly directing us toward the 
elevators. I get the distinct feeling they're not 
comfortable with the camaraderie among the victors, 
who couldn't seem to care less. As I walk toward the 
elevators, my hand still linked with Peeta's, someone 
else rustles up to my side. The girl pulls off a 
headdress of leafy branches and tosses it behind her 
without bothering to look where it falls. 

Johanna Mason. From District 7 Lumber and paper, 
thus the tree. She won by very convincingly 
portraying herself as weak and helpless so that she 
would be ignored. Then she demonstrated a wicked 
ability to murder. She ruffles up her spiky hair and 
rolls her wide-set brown eyes. "Isn't my costume 
awful? My stylist's the biggest idiot in the Capitol. 
Our tributes have been trees for forty years under 
her. Wish I'd gotten Cinna. You look fantastic." 

Girl talk. That thing I've always been so bad at. 
Opinions on clothes, hair, makeup. So I lie. "Yeah, 
he's been helping me design my own clothing line. 
You should see what he can do with velvet." Velvet. 
The only fabric. I could think of off the top of my 
head. 

"I have. On your tour. That strapless number you 
wore in District Two? The deep blue one with the 
diamonds? So gorgeous I wanted to reach through the 
screen and tear it right off your back," says Johanna. 

/ bet you did, I think. With a few inches of my flesh. 



200 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



While we wait for the elevators, Johanna unzips the 
rest of her tree, letting it drop to the floor, and then 
kicks it away in disgust. Except for her forest green 
slippers, she doesn't have on a stitch of clothing. 
"That's better." 

We end up on the same elevator with her, and she 
spends the whole ride to the seventh floor chatting to 
Peeta about his paintings while the light of his still- 
glowing costume reflects off her bare breasts. When 
she leaves, I ignore him, but I just know he's 
grinning. I toss aside his hand as the doors close 
behind Chaff and Seeder, leaving us alone, and he 
breaks out laughing. 

"What?" I say, turning on him as we step out on our 
floor. 

"It's you, Katniss. Can't you see?" he says. "What's 
me?" I say. 

"Why they're all acting like this. Finnick with his 
sugar cubes and Chaff kissing you and that whole 
thing with Johanna stripping down." He tries to take 
on a more serious tone, unsuccessfully. "They're 
playing with you because you're so... you know." 

"No, I don't know," I say. And I really have no idea 
what he's talking about. 

"It's like when you wouldn't look at me naked in the 
arena even though I was half dead. You're so... pure," 
he says finally. 

"I am not!" I say. "I've been practically ripping your 
clothes off every time there's been a camera for the 
last year!" 



201 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Yeah, but... I mean, for the Capitol, you're pure," he 
says, clearly trying to mollify me. "For me, you're 
perfect. They're just teasing you." 

"No, they're laughing at me, and so are you!" I say. 

"No." Peeta shakes his head, but he's still suppressing 
a smile. I'm seriously rethinking the question of who 
should get out of these Games alive when the other 
elevator opens. 

Haymitch and Effie join us, looking pleased about 
something. Then Haymitch 's face grows hard. 

What did I do now? I almost say, but I see he's staring 
behind me at the entrance to the dining room. 

Effie blinks in the same direction, then says brightly, 
"Looks like they've got you a matched set this year." 

I turn around and find the redheaded Avox girl who 
tended to me last year until the Games began. I think 
how nice it is to have a friend here. I notice that the 
young man beside her, another Avox, also has red 
hair. That must be what Effie meant by a matched 
set. 

Then a chill runs through me. Because I know him, 
too. Not from the Capitol but from years of having 
easy conversations in the Hob, joking over Greasy 
Sae's soup, and that last day watching him lie 
unconscious in the square while the life bled out of 
Gale. 

Our new Avox is Darius. 



202 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Haymitch grips my wrist as if anticipating my next 
move, but I am as speechless as the Capitol's 
torturers have rendered Darius. Haymitch once told 
me they did something to Avoxes' tongues so they 
could never talk again. In my head I hear Darius's 
voice, playful and bright, ringing across the Hob to 
tease me. Not as my fellow victors make fun of me 
now, but because we genuinely liked each other. If 
Gale could see him... 

I know any move I would make toward Darius, any 
act of recognition, would only result in punishment 
for him. So we just stare into each other's eyes. 
Darius, now a mute slave; me, now headed to death. 
What would we say, anyway? That we're sorry for the 
other's lot? That we ache for the other's pain? That 
we're glad we had the chance to know each other? 

No, Darius shouldn't be glad he knew me. If I had 
been there to stop Thread, he wouldn't have stepped 
forward to save Gale. Wouldn't be an Avox. And more 
specifically, wouldn't be my Avox, because President 
Snow has so obviously had him placed here for my 
benefit. 

I twist my wrist from Haymitch's grasp and head 
down to my old bedroom, locking the door behind me. 
I sit on the side of my bed, elbows on my knees, 
forehead on my fists, and watch my glowing suit in 
the darkness, imagining I am in my old home in 
District 12, huddled beside the fire. It slowly fades 
back to black as the power pack dies out. 

When Effie eventually knocks on the door to summon 

me to dinner, I get up and take off my suit, fold it 

203 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



neatly, and set it on the table with my crown. In the 
bathroom, I wash the dark streaks of makeup from 
my face. I dress in a simple shirt and pants and go 
down the hall to the dining room. 

I'm not aware of much at dinner except that Darius 
and the redheaded Avox girl are our servers. Effie, 
Haymitch, Cinna, Portia, and Peeta are all there, 
talking about the opening ceremonies, I suppose. But 
the only time I really feel present is when I purposely 
knock a dish of peas to the floor and, before anyone 
can stop me, crouch down to clean them up. Darius 
is right by me when I send the dish over, and we two 
are briefly side by side, obscured from view, as we 
scoop up the peas. For just one moment our hands 
meet. I can feel his skin, rough under the buttery 
sauce from the dish. In the tight, desperate clench of 
our fingers are all the words we will never be able to 
say. Then Effie 's clucking at me from behind about 
how "That isn't your job, Katniss!" and he lets go. 

When we go in to watch the recap of the opening 
ceremonies, I wedge myself in between Cinna and 
Haymitch on the couch because I don't want to be 
next to Peeta. This awfulness with Darius belongs to 
me and Gale and maybe even Haymitch, but not to 
Peeta. He might've known Darius to nod hello, but 
Peeta wasn't Hob the way the rest of us were. Besides, 
I'm still angry with him for laughing at me along with 
the other victors, and the last thing I want is his 
sympathy and comfort. I haven't changed my mind 
about saving him in the arena, but I don't owe him 
more than that. 

As I watch the procession to the City Circle, I think 
how it's bad enough that they dress us all up in 
costumes and parade us through the streets in 
chariots on a regular year. Kids in costumes are silly, 
but aging victors, it turns out, are pitiful. A few who 
204 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



are on the younger side, like Johanna and Finnick, or 
whose bodies haven't fallen into disrepair, like Seeder 
and Brutus, can still manage to maintain a little 
dignity. But the majority, who are in the clutches of 
drink or morphling or illness, look grotesque in their 
costumes, depicting cows and trees and loaves of 
bread. Last year we chattered away about each 
contestant, but tonight there's only the occasional 
comment. Small wonder the crowd goes wild when 
Peeta and I appear, looking so young and strong and 
beautiful in our brilliant costumes. The very image of 
what tributes should be. 

As soon as it's over, I stand up and thank Cinna and 
Portia for their amazing work and head off to bed. 
Effie calls a reminder to meet early for breakfast to 
work out our training strategy, but even her voice 
sounds hollow. Poor Effie. She finally had a decent 
year in the Games with Peeta and me, and now it's all 
broken down into a mess that even she can't put a 
positive spin on. In Capitol terms, I'm guessing this 
counts as a true tragedy. 

Soon after I go to bed, there's a quiet knock on my 
door, but I ignore it. I don't want Peeta tonight. 
Especially not with Darius around. It's almost as bad 
as if Gale were here. Gale. How am I supposed to let 
him go with Darius haunting the hallways? 

Tongues figure prominently in my nightmares. First I 
watch frozen and helpless while gloved hands carry 
out the bloody dissection in Darius's mouth. Then I'm 
at a party where everyone wears masks and someone 
with a flicking, wet tongue, who I suppose is Finnick, 
stalks me, but when he catches me and pulls off his 
mask, it's President Snow, and his puffy lips are 
dripping in bloody saliva. Finally I'm back in the 
arena, my own tongue as dry as sandpaper, while I 



205 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



try to reach a pool of water that recedes every time 
I'm about to touch it. 

When I wake, I stumble to the bathroom and gulp 
water from the faucet until I can hold no more. I strip 
off my sweaty clothes and fall back into bed, naked, 
and somehow find sleep again. 

I delay going down to breakfast as long as possible 
the next morning because I really don't want to 
discuss our training strategy. What's to discuss? 
Every victor already knows what everybody else can 
do. Or used to be able to do, anyway. So Peeta and I 
will continue to act in love and that's that. Somehow 
I'm just not up to talking about it, especially with 
Darius standing mutely by. I take a long shower, 
dress slowly in the outfit Cinna has left for training, 
and order food from the menu in my room by 
speaking into a mouthpiece. In a minute, sausage, 
eggs, potatoes, bread, juice, and hot chocolate 
appear. I eat my fill, trying to drag out the minutes 
until ten o'clock, when we have to go down to the 
Training Center. By nine-thirty, Haymitch is 
pounding on my door, obviously fed up with me, 
ordering me to the dining room NOW! Still, I brush 
my teeth before meandering down the hall, effectively 
killing another five minutes. 

The dining room's empty except for Peeta and 
Haymitch, whose face is flushed with drink and 
anger. On his wrist he wears a solid-gold bangle with 
a pattern of flames — this must be his concession to 
Effie's matching- token plan — that he twists 
unhappily. It's a very handsome bangle, really, but 
the movement makes it seem like something 
confining, a shackle, rather than a piece of jewelry. 
"You're late," he snarls at me. 



206 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Sorry. I slept in after the mutilated-tongue 
nightmares kept me up half the night." I mean to 
sound hostile, but my voice catches at the end of the 
sentence. 

Haymitch gives me a scowl, then relents. "All right, 
never mind. Today, in training, you've got two jobs. 
One, stay in love." 

"Obviously," I say. 

"And two, make some friends," says Haymitch. "No," I 
say. "I don't trust any of them, I can't stand most of 
them, and I'd rather operate with just the two of us." 
"That's what I said at first, but — " Peeta begins. 

"But it won't be enough," Haymitch insists. "You're 
going to need more allies this time around." 

"Why?" I ask. 

"Because you're at a distinct disadvantage. Your 
competitors have known each other for years. So who 
do you think they're going to target first?" he says. 

"Us. And nothing we're going to do is going to override 
any old friendship," I say. "So why bother?" 

"Because you can fight. You're popular with the 
crowd. That could still make you desirable allies. But 
only if you let the others know you're willing to team 
up with them," says Haymitch. 

"You mean you want us in the Career pack this year?" 
I ask, unable to hide my distaste. Traditionally the 
tributes from Districts 1, 2, and 4 join forces, possibly 
taking in a few other exceptional fighters, and hunt 
down the weaker competitors. 



207 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"That's been our strategy, hasn't it? To train like 
Careers?" counters Haymitch. "And who makes up 
the Career pack is generally agreed upon before the 
Games begin. Peeta barely got in with them last year." 

I think of the loathing I felt when I discovered Peeta 
was with the Careers during the last Games. "So we're 
to try to get in with Finnick and Brutus — is that what 
you're saying?" 

"Not necessarily. Everyone's a victor. Make your own 
pack if you'd rather. Choose who you like. I'd suggest 
Chaff and Seeder. Although Finnick's not to be 
ignored," says Haymitch. "Find someone to team up 
with who might be of some use to you. Remember, 
you're not in a ring full of trembling children 
anymore. These people are all experienced killers, no 
matter what shape they appear to be in." 

Maybe he's right. Only who could I trust? Seeder 
maybe. But do I really want to make a pact with her, 
only to possibly have to kill her later? No. Still, I made 
a pact with Rue under the same circumstances. I tell 
Haymitch 111 try, even though I think 111 be pretty bad 
at the whole thing. 

Effie shows up a bit early to take us down because 
last year, even though we were on time, we were the 
last two tributes to show up. But Haymitch tells her 
he doesn't want her taking us down to the gym. None 
of the other victors will be showing up with a 
babysitter, and being the youngest, it's even more 
important we look self-reliant. So she has to satisfy 
herself with taking us to the elevator, fussing over our 
hair, and pushing the button for us. 

It's such a short ride that there's no real time for 
conversation, but when Peeta takes my hand, I don't 
pull it away. I may have ignored him last night in 
208 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



private, but in training we must appear as an 
inseparable team. 



Effie needn't have worried about us being the last to 
arrive. Only Brutus and the woman from District 2, 
Enobaria, are present. Enobaria looks to be about 
thirty and all I can remember about her is that, in 
hand-to-hand combat, she killed one tribute by 
ripping open his throat with her teeth. She became so 
famous for this act that, after she was a victor, she 
had her teeth cosmetically altered so each one ends in 
a sharp point like a fang and is inlaid with gold. She 
has no shortage of admirers in the Capitol. 

By ten o'clock, only about half of the tributes have 
shown up. Atala, the woman who runs training, 
begins her spiel right on time, unfazed by the poor 
attendance. Maybe she expected it. I'm sort of 
relieved, because that means there are a dozen people 
I don't have to pretend to make friends with. Atala 
runs through the list of stations, which include both 
combat and survival skills, and releases us to train. 

I tell Peeta I think we'd do best to split up, thus 
covering more territory. When he goes off to chuck 
spears with Brutus and Chaff, I head over to the 
knot-tying station, hardly anyone ever bothers to visit 
it. I like the trainer and he remembers me fondly, 
maybe because I spent time with him last year. He's 
pleased when I show him I can still set the trap that 
leaves an enemy dangling by a leg from a tree. Clearly 
he took note of my snares in the arena last year and 
now sees me as an advanced pupil, so I ask him to 
review every kind of knot that might come in handy 
and a few that 111 probably never use. I'd be content 
to spend the morning alone with him, but after about 
an hour and a half, someone puts his arms around 
me from behind, his fingers easily finishing the 
complicated knot I've been sweating over. Of course 



209 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



it's Finnick, who seems to have spent his childhood 
doing nothing but wielding tridents and manipulating 
ropes into fancy knots for nets, I guess. I watch for a 
minute while he picks up a length of rope, makes a 
noose, and then pretends to hang himself for my 
amusement. 

Rolling my eyes, I head over to another vacant station 
where tributes can learn to build fires. I already make 
excellent fires, but I'm still pretty dependent on 
matches for starting them. So the trainer has me 
work with flint, steel, and some charred cloth. This is 
much harder than it looks, and even working as 
intently as I can, it takes me about an hour to get a 
fire going. I look up with a triumphant smile only to 
find I have company. 

The two tributes from District 3 are beside me, 
struggling to start a decent fire with matches. I think 
about leaving, but I really want to try using the flint 
again, and if I have to report back to Haymitch that I 
tried to make friends, these two might be a bearable 
choice. Both are small in stature with ashen skin and 
black hair. The woman, Wiress, is probably around 
my mother's age and speaks in a quiet, intelligent 
voice. But right away I notice she has a habit of 
dropping off her words in mid-sentence, as if she's 
forgotten you're there. Beetee, the man, is older and 
somewhat fidgety. He wears glasses but spends a lot 
of time looking under them. They're a little strange, 
but I'm pretty sure neither of them is going to try to 
make me uncomfortable by stripping naked. And 
they're from District 3. Maybe they can even confirm 
my suspicions of an uprising there. 

I glance around the Training Center. Peeta is at the 
center of a ribald circle of knife throwers. The 
morphlings from District 6 are in the camouflage 
station, painting each other's faces with bright pink 
210 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



swirls. The male tribute from District 5 is vomiting 
wine on the sword-fighting floor. Finnick and the old 
woman from his district are using the archery station. 
Johanna Mason is naked again and oiling her skin 
down for a wrestling lesson. I decide to stay put. 

Wiress and Beetee make decent company. They seem 
friendly enough but don't pry. We talk about our 
talents; they tell me they both invent things, which 
makes my supposed interest in fashion seem pretty 
weak. Wiress brings up some sort of stitching device 
she's working on. 

"It senses the density of the fabric and selects the 
strength," she says, and then becomes absorbed in a 
bit of dry straw before she can go on. 

"The strength of the thread," Beetee finishes 
explaining. "Automatically. It rules out human error." 
Then he talks about his recent success creating a 
musical chip that's tiny enough to be concealed in a 
flake of glitter but can hold hours of songs. I 
remember Octavia talking about this during the 
wedding shoot, and I see a possible chance to allude 
to the uprising. 

"Oh, yeah. My prep team was all upset a few months 
ago, I think, because they couldn't get hold of that," I 
say casually. "I guess a lot of orders from District 
Three were getting backed up." 

Beetee examines me under his glasses. "Yes. Did you 
have any similar backups in coal production, this 
year?" he asks. 

"No. Well, we lost a couple of weeks when they 
brought in a new Head Peacekeeper and his crew, but 
nothing major," I say. "To production, I mean. Two 



211 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



weeks sitting around your house doing nothing just 
means two weeks of being hungry for most people." 



I think they understand what I'm trying to say. That 
we've had no uprising. "Oh. That's a shame," says 
Wiress in a slightly disappointed voice. "I found your 
district very..." She trails off, distracted by something 
in her head. 

"Interesting," fills in Beetee. "We both did." 

I feel bad, knowing that their district must have 
suffered much worse than ours. I feel I have to defend 
my people. "Well, there aren't very many of us in 
Twelve," I say. "Not that you'd know it nowadays by 
the size of the Peacekeeping force. But I guess we're 
interesting enough." 

As we move over to the shelter station, Wiress stops 
and gazes up at the stands where the Gamemakers 
are roaming around, eating and drinking, sometimes 
taking notice of us. "Look," she says, giving her head 
a slight nod in their direction. I look up and see 
Plutarch Heavensbee in the magnificent purple robe 
with the fur-trimmed collar that designates him as 
Head Gamemaker. He's eating a turkey leg. 

I don't see why this merits comment, but I say, "Yes, 
he's been promoted to Head Gamemaker this year." 

"No, no. There by the corner of the table. You can 
just..." says Wiress. 

Beetee squints under his glasses. "Just make it out." 

I stare in that direction, perplexed. But then I see it. A 
patch of space about six inches square at the corner 
of the table seems almost to be vibrating. It's as if the 
air is rippling in tiny visible waves, distorting the 



212 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



sharp edges of the wood and a goblet of wine someone 
has set there. 

"A force field. They've set one up between the Game- 
makers and us. I wonder what brought that on," 
Beetee says. 

"Me, probably," I confess. "Last year I shot an arrow 
at them during my private training session." Beetee 
and Wiress look at me curiously. "I was provoked. So, 
do all force fields have a spot like that?" 

"Chink," says Wiress vaguely. 

"In the armor, as it were," finishes Beetee. "Ideally it'd 
be invisible, wouldn't it?" 

I want to ask them more, but lunch is announced. I 
look for Peeta, but he's hanging with a group of about 
ten other victors, so I decide just to eat with District 
3. Maybe I can get Seeder to join us. 

When we make our way into the dining area, I see 
some of Peeta's gang have other ideas. They're 
dragging all the smaller tables to form one large table 
so that we all have to eat together. Now I don't know 
what to do. Even at school I used to avoid eating at a 
crowded table. Frankly, I'd probably have sat alone if 
Madge hadn't made a habit of joining me. I guess I'd 
have eaten with Gale except, being two grades apart, 
our lunch never fell at the same time. 

I take a tray and start making my way around the 
food-laden carts that ring the room. Peeta catches up 
with me at the stew. "How's it going?" 

"Good. Fine. I like the District Three victors," I say. 
"Wiress and Beetee." 



213 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Really?" he asks. "They're something of a joke to the 
others." 

"Why does that not surprise me?" I say. I think of how 
Peeta was always surrounded at school by a crowd of 
friends. It's amazing, really, that he ever took any 
notice of me except to think I was odd. 

"Johanna's nicknamed them Nuts and Volts," he 
says. "I think she's Nuts and he's Volts." 

"And so I'm stupid for thinking they might be useful. 
Because of something Johanna Mason said while she 
was oiling up her breasts for wrestling," I retort. 

"Actually I think the nickname's been around for 
years. And I didn't mean that as an insult. I'm just 
sharing information," he says. 

"Well, Wiress and Beetee are smart. They invent 
things. They could tell by sight that a force field had 
been put up between us and the Gamemakers. And if 
we have to have allies, I want them." I toss the ladle 
back in a pot of stew, splattering us both with the 
gravy. 

"What are you so angry about?" Peeta asks, wiping 
the gravy from his shirtfront. "Because I teased you 
on the elevator? I'm sorry. I thought you would just 
laugh about it." 

"Forget it," I say with a shake of my head. "It's a lot of 
things." 

"Darius," he says. 

"Darius. The Games. Haymitch making us team up 
with the others," I say. 



214 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"It can just be you and me, you know," he says. 



"I know. But maybe Haymitch is right," I say. "Don't 
tell him I said so, but he usually is, where the Games 
are concerned." 

"Well, you can have final say about our allies. But 
right now, I'm leaning toward Chaff and Seeder," says 
Peeta. 

"I'm okay with Seeder, not Chaff," I say. "Not yet, 
anyway." 

"Come on and eat with him. I promise, I won't let him 
kiss you again," says Peeta. 

Chaff doesn't seem as bad at lunch. He's sober, and 
while he talks too loud and makes bad jokes a lot, 
most of them are at his own expense. I can see why 
he would be good for Haymitch, whose thoughts run 
so darkly. But I'm still not sure I'm ready to team up 
with him. 

I try hard to be more sociable, not just with Chaff but 
with the group at large. After lunch I do the edible- 
insect station with the District 8 tributes — Cecelia, 
who's got three kids at home, and Woof, a really old 
guy who's hard of hearing and doesn't seem to know 
what's going on since he keeps trying to stuff 
poisonous bugs in his mouth. I wish I could mention 
meeting Twill and Bonnie in the woods, but I can't 
figure out how. Cashmere and Gloss, the sister and 
brother from District 1 , invite me over and we make 
hammocks for a while. They're polite but cool, and I 
spend the whole time thinking about how I killed both 
the tributes from their district, Glimmer and Marvel, 
last year, and that they probably knew them and 
might even have been their mentors. Both my 
hammock and my attempt to connect with them are 



215 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



mediocre at best. I join Enobaria at sword training 
and exchange a few comments, but it's clear neither 
of us wants to team up. Finnick appears again when 
I'm picking up fishing tips, but mostly just to 
introduce me to Mags, the elderly woman who's also 
from District 4. Between her district accent and her 
garbled speech — possibly she's had a stroke — I can't 
make out more than one in four words. But I swear 
she can make a decent fishhook out of anything — a 
thorn, a wishbone, an earring. After a while I tune out 
the trainer and simply try to copy whatever Mags 
does. When I make a pretty good hook out of a bent 
nail and fasten it to some strands of my hair, she 
gives me a toothless smile and an unintelligible 
comment I think might be praise. Suddenly I 
remember how she volunteered to replace the young, 
hysterical woman in her district. It couldn't be 
because she thought she had any chance of winning. 
She did it to save the girl, just like I volunteered last 
year to save Prim. And I decide I want her on my 
team. 

Great. Now I have to go back and tell Haymitch I want 
an eighty -year-old and Nuts and Volts for my allies. 
Hell love that. 

So I give up trying to make friends and go over to the 
archery range for some sanity. It's wonderful there, 
getting to try out all the different bows and arrows. 
The trainer, Tax, seeing that the standing targets offer 
no challenge for me, begins to launch these silly fake 
birds high into the air for me to hit. At first it seems 
stupid, but it turns out to be kind of fun. Much more 
like hunting a moving creature. Since I'm hitting 
everything he throws up, he starts increasing the 
number of birds he sends airborne. I forget the rest of 
the gym and the victors and how miserable I am and 
lose myself in the shooting. When I manage to take 
down five birds in one round, I realize it's so quiet I 
216 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



can hear each one hit the floor. I turn and see the 
majority of the victors have stopped to watch me. 
Their faces show everything from envy to hatred to 
admiration. 

After training, Peeta and I hang out, waiting for 
Haymitch and Effie to show up for dinner. When we're 
called to eat, Haymitch pounces on me immediately. 
"So at least half the victors have instructed their 
mentors to request you as an ally. I know it can't be 
your sunny personality." 

"They saw her shoot," says Peeta with a smile. 
"Actually, I saw her shoot, for real, for the first time. 
I'm about to put in a formal request myself." 

"You're that good?" Haymitch asks me. "So good that 
Brutus wants you?" 

I shrug. "But I don't want Brutus. I want Mags and 
District Three." 

"Of course you do." Haymitch sighs and orders a 
bottle of wine. "Ill tell everybody you're still making 
up your mind." 

After my shooting exhibition, I still get teased some, 
but I no longer feel like I'm being mocked. In fact, I 
feel as if I've somehow been initiated into the victors' 
circle. During the next two days, I spend time with 
almost everybody headed for the arena. Even the 
morphlings, who, with Peeta's help, paint me into a 
field of yellow flowers. Even Finnick, who gives me an 
hour of trident lessons in exchange for an hour of 
archery instruction. And the more I come to know 
these people, the worse it is. Because, on the whole, I 
don't hate them. And some I like. And a lot of them 
are so damaged that my natural instinct would be to 



217 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



protect them. But all of them must die if I'm to save 
Peeta. 

The final day of training ends with our private 
sessions. We each get fifteen minutes before the 
Gamemakers to amaze them with our skills, but I 
don't know what any of us might have to show them. 
There's a lot of kidding about it at lunch. What we 
might do. Sing, dance, strip, tell jokes. Mags, who I 
can understand a little better now, decides she's just 
going to take a nap. I don't know what I'm going to 
do. Shoot some arrows, I guess. Haymitch said to 
surprise them if we could, but I'm fresh out of ideas. 

As the girl from 12, I'm scheduled to go last. The 
dining room gets quieter and quieter as the tributes 
file out to go perform. It's easier to keep up the 
irreverent, invincible manner we've all adopted when 
there are more of us. As people disappear through the 
door, all I can think is that they have a matter of days 
to live. 

Peeta and I are finally left alone. He reaches across 
the table to take my hands. "Decided what to do for 
the Gamemakers yet?" 

I shake my head. "I can't really use them for target 
practice this year, with the force field up and all. 
Maybe make some fishhooks. What about you?" 

"Not a clue. I keep wishing I could bake a cake or 
something," he says. 

"Do some more camouflage," I suggest. 

"If the morphlings have left me anything to work 
with," he says wryly. "They've been glued to that 
station since training started." 



218 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



We sit in silence awhile and then I blurt out the thing 
that's on both our minds. "How are we going to kill 
these people, Peeta?" 

"I don't know." He leans his forehead down on our 
entwined hands. 

"I don't want them as allies. Why did Haymitch want 
us to get to know them?" I say. "ItH make it so much 
harder than last time. Except for Rue maybe. But I 
guess I never really could've killed her, anyway. She 
was just too much like Prim." 

Peeta looks up at me, his brow creased in thought. 
"Her death was the most despicable, wasn't it?" 

"None of them were very pretty," I say, thinking of 
Glimmer's and Cato's ends. 

They call Peeta, so I wait by myself. Fifteen minutes 
pass. Then half an hour. It's close to forty minutes 
before I'm called. 

When I go in, I smell the sharp odor of cleaner and 
notice that one of the mats has been dragged to the 
center of the room. The mood is very different from 
last year's, when the Gamemakers were half drunk 
and distractedly picking at tidbits from the banquet 
table. They whisper among themselves, looking 
somewhat annoyed. What did Peeta do? Something to 
upset them? 

I feel a pang of worry. That isn't good. I don't want 
Peeta singling himself out as a target for the 
Gamemakers' anger. That's part of my job. To draw 
fire away from Peeta. But how did he upset them? 
Because I'd love to do just that and more. To break 
through the smug veneer of those who use their 
brains to find amusing ways to kill us. To make them 



219 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



realize that while we're vulnerable to the Capitol's 
cruelties, they are as well. 

Do you have any idea how much I hate you? I think. 
You, who have given your talents to the Games? 

I try to catch Plutarch Heavensbee's eye, but he 
seems to be intentionally ignoring me, as he has the 
entire training period. I remember how he sought me 
out for a dance, how pleased he was to show me the 
mockingjay on his watch. His friendly manner has no 
place here. How could it, when I'm a mere tribute and 
he's the Head Gamemaker? So powerful, so removed, 
so safe... 

Suddenly I know just what I'm going to do. Something 
that will blow anything Peeta did right out of the 
water. I go over to the knot-tying station and get a 
length of rope. I start to manipulate it, but it's hard 
because I've never made this actual knot myself. I've 
only watched Finnick's clever fingers, and they moved 
so fast. After about ten minutes, I've come up with a 
respectable noose. I drag one of the target dummies 
out into the middle of the room and, using some 
chinning bars, hang it so it dangles by the neck. 
Tying its hands behind its back would be a nice 
touch, but I think I might be running out of time. I 
hurry over to the camouflage station, where some of 
the other tributes, undoubtedly the morphlings, have 
made a colossal mess. But I find a partial container of 
bloodred berry juice that will serve my needs. The 
flesh-colored fabric of the dummy's skin makes a 
good, absorbent canvas. I carefully finger paint the 
words on its body, concealing them from view. Then I 
step away quickly to watch the reaction on the 
Gamemakers' faces as they read the name on the 
dummy. 

SENECA CRANE. 



220 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



The effect on the Gamemakers is immediate and 
satisfying. Several let out small shrieks. Others lose 
their grips on their wineglasses, which shatter 
musically against the ground. Two seem to be 
considering fainting. The look of shock is unanimous. 

Now I have Plutarch Heavensbee's attention. He 
stares steadily at me as the juice from the peach he 
crushed in his hand runs through his fingers. Finally 
he clears his throat and says, "You may go now, Miss 
Everdeen." 

I give a respectful nod and turn to go, but at the last 
moment I can't resist tossing the container of berry 
juice over my shoulder. I can hear the contents 
splatter against the dummy while a couple more 
wineglasses break. As the elevator doors close before 
me, I see no one has moved. 

That surprised them, I think. It was rash and 
dangerous and no doubt I will pay for it ten times 
over. But for the moment, I feel something close to 
elation and I let myself savor it. 

I want to find Haymitch immediately and tell him 
about my session, but no one's around. I guess 
they're getting ready for dinner and I decide to go take 
a shower myself, since my hands are stained from the 
juice. As I stand in the water, I begin to wonder about 
the wisdom of my latest trick. The question that 
should now always be my guide is "Will this help 
Peeta stay alive?" Indirectly, this might not. What 
happens in training is highly secretive, so there's no 
point in taking action against me when no one will 



221 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



know what my transgression was. In fact, last year I 
was rewarded for my brashness. This is a different 
sort of crime, though. If the Gamemakers are angry 
with me and decide to punish me in the arena, Peeta 
could get caught up in the attack as well. Maybe it 
was too impulsive. Still... I can't say I'm sorry I did it. 

As we all gather for dinner, I notice Peeta's hands are 
faintly stained with a variety of colors, even though 
his hair is still damp from bathing. He must have 
done some form of camouflage after all. Once the 
soup is served, Haymitch gets right to the issue on 
everyone's mind. "All right, so how did your private 
sessions go?" 

I exchange a look with Peeta. Somehow I'm not that 
eager to put what I did into words. In the calm of the 
dining room, it seems very extreme. "You first," I say 
to him. "It must have been really special. I had to wait 
for forty minutes to go in." 

Peeta seems to be struck with the same reluctance 
I'm experiencing. "Well, I — I did the camouflage thing, 
like you suggested, Katniss." He hesitates. "Not 
exactly camouflage. I mean, I used the dyes." 

"To do what?" asks Portia. 

I think of how ruffled the Gamemakers were when I 
entered the gym for my session. The smell of cleaners. 
The mat pulled over that spot in the center of the 
gym. Was it to conceal something they were unable to 
wash away? "You painted something, didn't you? A 
picture." "Did you see it?" Peeta asks. 

"No. But they'd made a real point of covering it up," I 
say. 



222 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Well, that would be standard. They can't let one 
tribute know what another did," says Effie, 
unconcerned. "What did you paint, Peeta?" She looks 
a little misty. "Was it a picture of Katniss?" 

"Why would he paint a picture of me, Effie?" I ask, 
somehow annoyed. 

"To show he's going to do everything he can to defend 
you. That's what everyone in the Capitol's expecting, 
anyway. Didn't he volunteer to go in with you?" Effie 
says, as if it's the most obvious thing in the world. 

"Actually, I painted a picture of Rue," Peeta says. 
"How she looked after Katniss had covered her in 
flowers." 

There's a long pause at the table while everyone 
absorbs this. "And what exactly were you trying to 
accomplish?" Haymitch asks in a very measured 
voice. 

"I'm not sure. I just wanted to hold them accountable, 
if only for a moment," says Peeta. "For killing that 
little girl." 

"This is dreadful." Effie sounds like she's about to cry. 
"That sort of thinking... it's forbidden, Peeta. 
Absolutely. You'll only bring down more trouble on 
yourself and Katniss." 

"I have to agree with Effie on this one," says 
Haymitch. Portia and Cinna remain silent, but their 
faces are very serious. Of course, they're right. But 
even though it worries me, I think what he did was 
amazing. 

"I guess this is a bad time to mention I hung a 
dummy and painted Seneca Crane's name on it," I 



223 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



say. This has the desired effect. After a moment of 
disbelief, all the disapproval in the room hits me like 
a ton of bricks. 

"You... hung... Seneca Crane?" says Cinna. 

"Yes. I was showing off my new knot-tying skills, and 
he somehow ended up at the end of the noose," I say. 

"Oh, Katniss," says Effie in a hushed voice. "How do 
you even know about that?" 

"Is it a secret? President Snow didn't act like it was. 
In fact, he seemed eager for me to know," I say. Effie 
leaves the table with her napkin pressed to her face. 
"Now I've upset Effie. I should have lied and said I 
shot some arrows." 

"You'd have thought we planned it," says Peeta, giving 
me just the hint of a smile. 

"Didn't you?" asks Portia. Her fingers press her 
eyelids closed as if she's warding off a very bright 
light. 

"No," I say, looking at Peeta with a new sense of 
appreciation. "Neither of us even knew what we were 
going to do before we went in." 

"And, Haymitch?" says Peeta. "We decided we don't 
want any other allies in the arena." 

"Good. Then I won't be responsible for you killing off 
any of my friends with your stupidity," he says. 

"That's just what we were thinking," I tell him. 

We finish the meal in silence, but when we rise to go 
into the sitting room, Cinna puts his arm around me 



224 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



and gives me a squeeze. "Come on and let's go get 
those training scores." 

We gather around the television set and a red-eyed 
Effie rejoins us. The tributes' faces come up, district 
by district, and their scores flash under their 
pictures. One through twelve. Predictably high scores 
for Cashmere, Gloss, Brutus, Enobaria, and Finnick. 
Low to medium for the rest. 

"Have they ever given a zero?" I ask. 

"No, but there's a first time for everything," Cinna 
answers. 

And it turns out he's right. Because when Peeta and I 
each pull a twelve, we make Hunger Games history. 
No one feels like celebrating, though. 

"Why did they do that?" I ask. 

"So that the others will have no choice but to target 
you," says Haymitch flatly. "Go to bed. I can't stand to 
look at either one of you." 

Peeta walks me down to my room in silence, but 
before he can say good night, I wrap my arms around 
him and rest my head against his chest. His hands 
slide up my back and his cheek leans against my 
hair. "I'm sorry if I made things worse," I say. 

"No worse than I did. Why did you do it, anyway?" he 
says. 

"I don't know. To show them that I'm more than just a 
piece in their Games?" I say. 

He laughs a little, no doubt remembering the night 
before the Games last year. We were on the roof, 



225 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



neither of us able to sleep. Peeta had said something 
of the sort then, but I hadn't understood what he 
meant. Now I do. 

"Me, too," he tells me. "And I'm not saying I'm not 
going to try. To get you home, I mean. But if I'm 
perfectly honest about it..." 

"If you're perfectly honest about it, you think 
President Snow has probably given them direct orders 
to make sure we die in the arena anyway," I say. 

"It's crossed my mind," says Peeta. 

It's crossed my mind, too. Repeatedly. But while I 
know 111 never leave that arena alive, I'm still holding 
on to the hope that Peeta will. After all, he didn't pull 
out those berries, I did. No one has ever doubted that 
Peeta's defiance was motivated by love. So maybe 
President Snow will prefer keeping him alive, crushed 
and heartbroken, as a living warning to others. 

"But even if that happens, everyone will know we've 
gone out fighting, right?" Peeta asks. 

"Everyone will," I reply. And for the first time, I 
distance myself from the personal tragedy that has 
consumed me since they announced the Quell. I 
remember the old man they shot in District 1 1 , and 
Bonnie and Twill, and the rumored uprisings. Yes, 
everyone in the districts will be watching me to see 
how I handle this death sentence, this final act of 
President Snow's dominance. They will be looking for 
some sign that their battles have not been in vain. If I 
can make it clear that I'm still defying the Capitol 
right up to the end, the Capitol will have killed me... 
but not my spirit. What better way to give hope to the 
rebels? 



226 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



The beauty of this idea is that my decision to keep 
Peeta alive at the expense of my own life is itself an 
act of defiance. A refusal to play the Hunger Games 
by the Capitol's rules. My private agenda dovetails 
completely with my public one. And if I really could 
save Peeta. . . in terms of a revolution, this would be 
ideal. Because I will be more valuable dead. They can 
turn me into some kind of martyr for the cause and 
paint my face on banners, and it will do more to rally 
people than anything I could do if I was living. But 
Peeta would be more valuable alive, and tragic, 
because he will be able to turn his pain into words 
that will transform people. 

Peeta would lose it if he knew I was thinking any of 
this, so I only say, "So what should we do with our 
last few days?" 

"I just want to spend every possible minute of the rest 
of my life with you," Peeta replies. 

"Come on, then," I say, pulling him into my room. 

It feels like such a luxury, sleeping with Peeta again. I 
didn't realize until now how starved I've been for 
human closeness. For the feel of him beside me in the 
darkness. I wish I hadn't wasted the last couple of 
nights shutting him out. I sink down into sleep, 
enveloped in his warmth, and when I open my eyes 
again, daylight's streaming through the windows. 

"No nightmares," he says. 

"No nightmares," I confirm. "You?" 

"None. I'd forgotten what a real night's sleep feels 
like," he says. 



227 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



We lie there for a while, in no rush to begin the day. 
Tomorrow night will be the televised interview, so 
today Effie and Haymitch should be coaching us. 
More high heels and sarcastic comments, I think. But 
then the redheaded Avox girl comes in with a note 
from Effie saying that, given our recent tour, both she 
and Haymitch have agreed we can handle ourselves 
adequately in public. The coaching sessions have 
been canceled. 

"Really?" says Peeta, taking the note from my hand 
and examining it. "Do you know what this means? 
Well have the whole day to ourselves." 

"It's too bad we can't go somewhere," I say wistfully. 

"Who says we can't?" he asks. 

The roof. We order a bunch of food, grab some 
blankets, and head up to the roof for a picnic. A 
daylong picnic in the flower garden that tinkles with 
wind chimes. We eat. We lie in the sun. I snap off 
hanging vines and use my newfound knowledge from 
training to practice knots and weave nets. Peeta 
sketches me. We make up a game with the force field 
that surrounds the roof — one of us throws an apple 
into it and the other person has to catch it. 

No one bothers us. By late afternoon, I lie with my 
head on Peeta's lap, making a crown of flowers while 
he fiddles with my hair, claiming he's practicing his 
knots. After a while, his hands go still. "What?" I ask. 

"I wish I could freeze this moment, right here, right 
now, and live in it forever," he says. 

Usually this sort of comment, the kind that hints of 
his undying love for me, makes me feel guilty and 
awful. But I feel so warm and relaxed and beyond 
228 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



worrying about a future I'll never have, I just let the 
word slip out. "Okay." 



I can hear the smile in his voice. "Then you'll allow 
it?" 

"I'll allow it," I say. 

His fingers go back to my hair and I doze off, but he 
rouses me to see the sunset. It's a spectacular yellow 
and orange blaze behind the skyline of the Capitol. "I 
didn't think you'd want to miss it," he says. 

"Thanks," I say. Because I can count on my fingers 
the number of sunsets I have left, and I don't want to 
miss any of them. 

We don't go and join the others for dinner, and no one 
summons us. 

"I'm glad. I'm tired of making everyone around me so 
miserable," says Peeta. "Everybody crying. Or 
Haymitch..." He doesn't need to go on. 

We stay on the roof until bedtime and then quietly 
slip down to my room without encountering anyone. 

The next morning, we're roused by my prep team. The 
sight of Peeta and me sleeping together is too much 
for Octavia, because she bursts into tears right away. 
"You remember what Cinna told us," Venia says 
fiercely. Octavia nods and goes out sobbing. 

Peeta has to return to his room for prep, and I'm left 
alone with Venia and Flavius. The usual chatter has 
been suspended. In fact, there's little talk at all, other 
than to have me raise my chin or comment on a 
makeup technique. It's nearly lunch when I feel 
something dripping on my shoulder and turn to find 



229 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Flavius, who's snipping away at my hair with silent 
tears running down his face. Venia gives him a look, 
and he gently sets the scissors on the table and 
leaves. 

Then it's just Venia, whose skin is so pale her tattoos 
appear to be leaping off it. Almost rigid with 
determination, she does my hair and nails and 
makeup, fingers flying swiftly to compensate for her 
absent teammates. The whole time, she avoids my 
gaze. It's only when Cinna shows up to approve me 
and dismiss her that she takes my hands, looks me 
straight in the eye, and says, "We would all like you to 
know what a. . . privilege it has been to make you look 
your best." Then she hastens from the room. 

My prep team. My foolish, shallow, affectionate pets, 
with their obsessions with feathers and parties, 
nearly break my heart with their good-bye. It's certain 
from Venia's last words that we all know I won't be 
returning. Does the whole world know it? I wonder. I 
look at Cinna. He knows, certainly. But as he 
promised, there's no danger of tears from him. 

"So, what am I wearing tonight?" I ask, eyeing the 
garment bag that holds my dress. 

"President Snow put in the dress order himself," says 
Cinna. He unzips the bag, revealing one of the 
wedding dresses I wore for the photo shoot. Heavy 
white silk with a low neckline and tight waist and 
sleeves that fall from my wrists to the floor. And 
pearls. Everywhere pearls. Stitched into the dress and 
in ropes at my throat and forming the crown for the 
veil. "Even though they announced the Quarter Quell 
the night of the photo shoot, people Still voted for 
their favorite dress, and this was the winner. The 
president says you're to wear it tonight. Our 
objections were ignored." 

230 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I rub a bit of the silk between my fingers, trying to 
figure out President Snow's reasoning. I suppose 
since I was the greatest offender, my pain and loss 
and humiliation should be in the brightest spotlight. 
This, he thinks, will make that clear. It's so barbaric, 
the president turning my bridal gown into my shroud, 
that the blow strikes home, leaving me with a dull 
ache inside. "Well, it'd be a shame to waste such a 
pretty dress" is all I say. 

Cinna helps me carefully into the gown. As it settles 
on my shoulders, they can't help giving a shrug of 
complaint. "Was it always this heavy?" I ask. I 
remember several of the dresses being dense, but this 
one feels like it weighs a ton. 

"I had to make some slight alterations because of the 
lighting," says Cinna. I nod, but I can't see what that 
has to do with anything. He decks me out in the 
shoes and the pearl jewelry and the veil. Touches up 
my makeup. Has me walk. 

"You're ravishing," he says. "Now, Katniss, because 
this bodice is so fitted, I don't want you raising your 
arms above your head. Well, not until you twirl, 
anyway." 

"Will I be twirling again?" I ask, thinking of my dress 
last year. 

"I'm sure Caesar will ask you. And if he doesn't, you 
suggest it yourself. Only not right away. Save it for 
your big finale," Cinna instructs me. 

"You give me a signal so I know when," I say. 

"All right. Any plans for your interview? I know 
Haymitch left you two to your own devices," he says. 



231 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"No, this year I'm just winging it. The funny thing is, 
I'm not nervous at all." And I'm not. However much 
President Snow may hate me, this Capitol audience is 
mine. 

We meet up with Effie, Haymitch, Portia, and Peeta at 
the elevator. Peeta's in an elegant tuxedo and white 
gloves. The sort of thing grooms wear to get married 
in, here in the Capitol. 

Back home everything is so much simpler. A woman 
usually rents a white dress that's been worn 
hundreds of times. The man wears something clean 
that's not mining clothes. They fill out some forms at 
the Justice Building and are assigned a house. 
Family and friends gather for a meal or bit of cake, if 
it can be afforded. Even if it can't, there's always a 
traditional song we sing as the new couple crosses the 
threshold of their home. And we have our own little 
ceremony, where they make their first fire, toast a bit 
of bread, and share it. Maybe it's old-fashioned, but 
no one really feels married in District 12 until after 
the toasting. 

The other tributes have already gathered offstage and 
are talking softly, but when Peeta and I arrive, they 
fall silent. I realize everyone's staring daggers at my 
wedding dress. Are they jealous of its beauty? The 
power it might have to manipulate the crowd? 

Finally Finnick says, "I can't believe Cinna put you in 
that thing." 

"He didn't have any choice. President Snow made 
him," I say, somewhat defensively. I won't let anyone 
criticize Cinna. 

Cashmere tosses her flowing blond curls back and 
spits out, "Well, you look ridiculous!" She grabs her 
232 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



brother's hand and pulls him into place to lead our 
procession onto the stage. The other tributes begin to 
line up as well. I'm confused because, while they all 
are angry, some are giving us sympathetic pats on the 
shoulder, and Johanna Mason actually stops to 
straighten my pearl necklace. 

"Make him pay for it, okay?" she says. 

I nod, but I don't know what she means. Not until 
we're all sitting out onstage and Caesar Flickerman, 
hair and face highlighted in lavender this year, has 
done his opening spiel and the tributes begin their 
interviews. This is the first time I realize the depth of 
betrayal felt among the victors and the rage that 
accompanies it. But they are so smart, so wonderfully 
smart about how they play it, because it all comes 
back to reflect on the government and President Snow 
in particular. Not everyone. There are the old 
throwbacks, like Brutus and Enobaria, who are just 
here for another Games, and those too baffled or 
drugged or lost to join in on the attack. But there are 
enough victors who still have the wits and the nerve 
to come out fighting. 

Cashmere starts the ball rolling with a speech about 
how she just can't stop crying when she thinks of how 
much the people in the Capitol must be suffering 
because they will lose us. Gloss recalls the kindness 
shown here to him and his sister. Beetee questions 
the legality of the Quell in his nervous, twitchy way, 
wondering if it's been fully examined by experts of 
late. Finnick recites a poem he wrote to his one true 
love in the Capitol, and about a hundred people faint 
because they're sure he means them. By the time 
Johanna Mason gets up, she's asking if something 
can't be done about the situation. Surely the creators 
of the Quarter Quell never anticipated such love 
forming between the victors and the Capitol. No one 
233 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



could be so cruel as to sever such a deep bond. 
Seeder quietly ruminates about how, back in District 
11, everyone assumes President Snow is all-powerful. 
So if he's all-powerful, why doesn't he change the 
Quell? And Chaff, who comes right on her heels, 
insists the president could change the Quell if he 
wanted to, but he must not think it matters much to 
anyone. 

By the time I'm introduced, the audience is an 
absolute wreck. People have been weeping and 
collapsing and even calling for change. The sight of 
me in my white silk bridal gown practically causes a 
riot. No more me, no more star-crossed lovers living 
happily ever after, no more wedding. I can see even 
Caesar's professionalism showing some cracks as he 
tries to quiet them so I can speak, but my three 
minutes are ticking quickly away. 

Finally there's a lull and he gets out, "So, Katniss, 
obviously this is a very emotional night for everyone. 
Is there anything you'd like to say?" 

My voice trembles as I speak. "Only that I'm so sorry 
you won't get to be at my wedding... but I'm glad you 
at least get to see me in my dress. Isn't it just... the 
most beautiful thing?" I don't have to look at Cinna 
for a signal. I know this is the right time. I begin to 
twirl slowly, raising the sleeves of my heavy gown 
above my head. 

When I hear the screams of the crowd, I think it's 
because I must look stunning. Then I notice 
something is rising up around me. Smoke. From fire. 
Not the flickery stuff I wore last year in the chariot, 
but something much more real that devours my 
dress. I begin to panic as the smoke thickens. 
Charred bits of black silk swirl into the air, and pearls 
clatter to the stage. Somehow I'm afraid to stop 
234 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



because my flesh doesn't seem to be burning and I 
know Cinna must be behind whatever is happening. 
So I keep spinning and spinning. For a split second 
I'm gasping, completely engulfed in the strange 
flames. Then all at once, the fire is gone. I slowly 
come to a stop, wondering if I'm naked and why 
Cinna has arranged to burn away my wedding dress. 

But I'm not naked. I'm in a dress of the exact design 
of my wedding dress, only it's the color of coal and 
made of tiny feathers. Wonderingly, I lift my long, 
flowing sleeves into the air, and that's when I see 
myself on the television screen. Clothed in black 
except for the white patches on my sleeves. Or should 
I say my wings. 

Because Cinna has turned me into a mockingjay. 



235 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I'm still smoldering a little, so it's with a tentative 
hand that Caesar reaches out to touch my headpiece. 
The white has burned away, leaving a smooth, fitted 
veil of black that drapes into the neckline of the dress 
in the back. "Feathers," says Caesar. "You're like a 
bird." 

"A mockingjay, I think," I say, giving my wings a small 
flap. "It's the bird on the pin I wear as a token." 

A shadow of recognition flickers across Caesar's face, 
and I can tell he knows that the mockingjay isn't just 
my token. That it's come to symbolize so much more. 
That what will be seen as a flashy costume change in 
the Capitol is resonating in an entirely different way 
throughout the districts. But he makes the best of it. 

"Well, hats off to your stylist. I don't think anyone can 
argue that that's not the most spectacular thing we've 
ever seen in an interview. Cinna, I think you better 
take a bow!" Caesar gestures for Cinna to rise. He 
does, and makes a small, gracious bow. And suddenly 
I am so afraid for him. What has he done? Something 
terribly dangerous. An act of rebellion in itself. And 
he's done it for me. I remember his words... 

"Don't worry. I always channel my emotions into my 
work. That way I don't hurt anyone but myself. " 

...and I'm afraid he has hurt himself beyond repair. 
The significance of my fiery transformation will not be 
lost on President Snow. 

The audience, who's been stunned into silence, 

breaks into wild applause. I can barely hear the 

236 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



buzzer that indicates that my three minutes are up. 
Caesar thanks me and I go back to my seat, my dress 
now feeling lighter than air. 

As I pass Peeta, who's headed for his interview, he 
doesn't meet my eyes. I take my seat carefully, but 
aside from the puffs of smoke here and there, I seem 
unharmed, so I turn my attention to him. 

Caesar and Peeta have been a natural team since 
they first appeared together a year ago. Their easy 
give-and-take, comic timing, and ability to segue into 
heart-wrenching moments, like Peeta's confession of 
love for me, have made them a huge success with the 
audience. They effortlessly open with a few jokes 
about fires and feathers and overcooking poultry. But 
anyone can see that Peeta is preoccupied, so Caesar 
directs the conversation right into the subject that's 
on everyone's minds. 

"So, Peeta, what was it like when, after all you've been 
through, you found out about the Quell?" asks 
Caesar. 

"I was in shock. I mean, one minute I'm seeing 
Katniss looking so beautiful in all these wedding 
gowns, and the next..." Peeta trails off. 

"You realized there was never going to be a wedding?" 
asks Caesar gently. 

Peeta pauses for a long moment, as if deciding 
something. He looks out at the spellbound audience, 
then at tin floor, then finally up at Caesar. "Caesar, 
do you think all our friends here can keep a secret?" 

An uncomfortable laugh emanates from the audience. 
What can he mean? Keep a secret from who? Our 
whole world is watching. 

237 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"I feel quite certain of it," says Caesar. 

"We're already married," says Peeta quietly. The crowd 
reacts in astonishment, and I have to bury my face in 
the folds of my skirt so they can't see my confusion. 
Where on earth is he going with this? 

"But... how can that be?" asks Caesar. 

"Oh, it's not an official marriage. We didn't go to the 
Justice Building or anything. But we have this 
marriage ritual in District Twelve. I don't know what 
it's like in the other districts. But there's this thing we 
do," says Peeta, and he briefly describes the toasting. 

"Were your families there?" asks Caesar. 

"No, we didn't tell anyone. Not even Haymitch. And 
Katniss's mother would never have approved. But you 
see, we knew if we were married in the Capitol, there 
wouldn't be a toasting. And neither of us really 
wanted to wait any longer. So one day, we just did it," 
Peeta says. "And to us, we're more married than any 
piece of paper or big party could make us." 

"So this was before the Quell?" says Caesar. 

"Of course before the Quell. I'm sure we'd never have 
done it after we knew," says Peeta, starting to get 
upset. "But who could've seen it coming? No one. We 
went through the Games, we were victors, everyone 
seemed so thrilled to see us together, and then out of 
nowhere — I mean, how could we anticipate a thing 
like that?" 

"You couldn't, Peeta." Caesar puts an arm around his 
shoulders. "As you say, no one could've. But I have to 
confess, I'm glad you two had at least a few months of 
happiness together." 



238 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Enormous applause. As if encouraged, I look up from 
my feathers and let the audience see my tragic smile 
of thanks. The residual smoke from the feathers has 
made my eyes teary, which adds a very nice touch. 

"I'm not glad," says Peeta. "I wish we had waited until 
the whole thing was done officially." 

This takes even Caesar aback. "Surely even a brief 
time is better than no time?" 

"Maybe I'd think that, too, Caesar," says Peeta 
bitterly, "if it weren't for the baby." 

There. He's done it again. Dropped a bomb that wipes 
out the efforts of every tribute who came before him. 
Well, maybe not. Maybe this year he has only lit the 
fuse on a bomb that the victors themselves have been 
building. Hoping someone would be able to detonate 
it. Perhaps thinking it would be me in my bridal 
gown. Not knowing how much I rely on Cinna's 
talents, whereas Peeta needs nothing more than his 
wits. 

As the bomb explodes, it sends accusations of 
injustice and barbarism and cruelty flying out in 
every direction. Even the most Capitol-loving, Games- 
hungry, bloodthirsty person out there can't ignore, at 
least for a moment, how horrific the whole thing is. 

I am pregnant. 

The audience can't absorb the news right away. It has 
to strike them and sink in and be confirmed by other 
voices before they begin to sound like a herd of 
wounded animals, moaning, shrieking, calling for 
help. And me? I know my face is projected in a tight 
close-up on the screen, but I don't make any effort to 
hide it. Because for a moment, even I am working 
239 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



through what Peeta has said. Isn't it the thing I 
dreaded most about the wedding, about the future — 
the loss of my children to the Games? And it could be 
true now, couldn't it? If I hadn't spent my life building 
up layers of defenses until I recoil at even the 
suggestion of marriage or a family? 

Caesar can't rein in the crowd again, not even when 
the buzzer sounds. Peeta nods his good-bye and 
comes back to his seat without any more 
conversation. I can see Caesar's lips moving, but the 
place is in total chaos and I can't hear a word. Only 
the blast of the anthem, cranked up so loud I can feel 
it vibrating through my bones, lets us know where we 
stand in the program. I automatically rise and, as I 
do, I sense Peeta reaching out for me. Tears run down 
his face as I take his hand. How real are the tears? Is 
this an acknowledgment that he has been stalked by 
the same fears that I have? That every victor has? 
Every parent in every district in Panem? 

I look back to the crowd, but the faces of Rue's 
mother and father swim before my eyes. Their sorrow. 
Their loss. I turn spontaneously to Chaff and offer my 
hand. I feel my fingers close around the stump that 
now completes his arm and hold fast. 

And then it happens. Up and down the row, the 
victors begin to join hands. Some right away, like the 
morphlings, or Wiress and Beetee. Others unsure but 
caught up in the demands of those around them, like 
Brutus and Enobaria. By the time the anthem plays 
its final strains, all twenty-four of us stand in one 
unbroken line in what must be the first public show 
of unity among the districts since the Dark Days. You 
can see the realization of this as the screens begin to 
pop into blackness. It's too late, though. In the 
confusion they didn't cut us off in time. Everyone has 
seen. 



240 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



There's disorder on the stage now, too, as the lights 
go out and we're left to stumble back into the 
Training Center. I've lost hold of Chaff, but Peeta 
guides me into an elevator. Finnick and Johanna try 
to join us, but a harried Peacekeeper blocks their way 
and we shoot upward alone. 

The moment we step off the elevator, Peeta grips my 
shoulders. "There isn't much time, so tell me. Is there 
anything I have to apologize for?" 

"Nothing," I say. It was a big leap to take without my 
okay, but I'm just as glad I didn't know, didn't have 
time to second-guess him, to let any guilt over Gale 
detract from how I really feel about what Peeta did. 
Which is empowered. 

Somewhere, very far off, is a place called District 12, 
where my mother and sister and friends will have to 
deal with the fallout from this night. Just a brief 
hovercraft ride away is an arena where, tomorrow, 
Peeta and I and the other tributes will face our own 
form of punishment. But even if all of us meet terrible 
ends, something happened on that stage tonight that 
can't be undone. We victors staged our own uprising, 
and maybe, just maybe, the Capitol won't be able to 
contain this one. 

We wait for the others to return, but when the 
elevator opens, only Haymitch appears. "It's madness 
out there. Everyone's been sent home and they've 
canceled the recap of the interviews on television." 

Peeta and I hurry to the window and try to make 
sense of the commotion far below us on the streets. 
"What are they saying?" Peeta asks. "Are they asking 
the president to stop the Games?" 



241 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"I don't think they know themselves what to ask. The 
whole situation is unprecedented. Even the idea of 
opposing the Capitol's agenda is a source of confusion 
for the people here," says Haymitch. "But there's no 
way Snow would cancel the Games. You know that, 
right?" 

I do. Of course, he could never back down now. The 
only option left to him is to strike back, and strike 
back hard. "The others went home?" I ask. 

"They were ordered to. I don't know how much luck 
they're having getting through the mob," says 
Haymitch. 

"Then we'll never see Effie again," says Peeta. We 
didn't see her on the morning of the Games last year. 
"You'll give her our thanks." 

"More than that. Really make it special. It's Effie, after 
all," I say. "Tell her how appreciative we are and how 
she was the best escort ever and tell her. . . tell her we 
send our love." 

For a while we just stand there in silence, delaying 
the inevitable. Then Haymitch says it. "I guess this is 
where we say our good-byes as well." 

"Any last words of advice?" Peeta asks. 

"Stay alive," Haymitch says gruffly. That's almost an 
old joke with us now. He gives us each a quick 
embrace, and I can tell it's all he can stand. "Go to 
bed. You need your rest." 

I know I should say a whole bunch of things to 
Haymitch, but I can't think of anything he doesn't 
already know, really, and my throat is so tight I doubt 



242 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



anything would come out, anyway. So, once again, I 
let Peeta speak for us both. 

"You take care, Haymitch," he says. 

We cross the room, but in the doorway, Haymitch's 
voice stops us. "Katniss, when you're in the arena," 
he begins. Then he pauses. He's scowling in a way 
that makes me sure I've already disappointed him. 

"What?" I ask defensively. 

"You just remember who the enemy is," Haymitch 
tells me. "That's all. Now go on. Get out of here." 

We walk down the hallway. Peeta wants to stop by his 
room to shower off the makeup and meet me in a few 
minutes, but I won't let him. I'm certain that if a door 
shuts between us, it will lock and 111 have to spend 
the night without him. Besides, I have a shower in my 
room. I refuse to let go of his hand. 

Do we sleep? I don't know. We spend the night 
holding each other, in some halfway land between 
dreams and waking. Not talking. Both afraid to 
disturb the other in the hope that well be able to 
store up a few precious minutes of rest. 

Cinna and Portia arrive with the dawn, and I know 
Peeta will have to go. Tributes enter the arena alone. 
He gives me a light kiss. "See you soon," he says. 

"See you soon," I answer. 

Cinna, who will help dress me for the Games, 
accompanies me to the roof. I'm about to mount the 
ladder to the hovercraft when I remember. "I didn't 
say good-bye to Portia." 



243 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I'll tell her," says Cinna. 



The electric current freezes me in place on the ladder 
until the doctor injects the tracker into my left 
forearm. Now they will always be able to locate me in 
the arena. The hovercraft takes off, and I look out the 
windows until they black out. Cinna keeps pressing 
me to eat and, when that fails, to drink. I manage to 
keep sipping water, thinking of the days of 
dehydration that almost killed me last year. Thinking 
of how I will need my strength to keep Peeta alive. 

When we reach the Launch Room at the arena, I 
shower. Cinna braids my hair down my back and 
helps me dress over simple undergarments. This 
year's tribute outfit is a fitted blue jumpsuit, made of 
very sheer material, that zippers up the front. A six- 
inch- wide padded belt covered in shiny purple plastic. 
A pair of nylon shoes with rubber soles. 

"What do you think?" I ask, holding the fabric out for 
Cinna to examine. 

He frowns as he rubs the thin stuff between his 
fingers. "I don't know. It will offer little in the way of 
protection from cold or water." 

"Sun?" I ask, picturing a burning sun over a barren 
desert. 

"Possibly. If it's been treated," he says. "Oh, I almost 
forgot this." He takes my gold mockingjay pin from 
his pocket and fixes it to the jumpsuit. 

"My dress was fantastic last night," I say. Fantastic 
and reckless. But Cinna must know that. 

"I thought you might like it," he says with a tight 
smile. 



244 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



We sit, as we did last year, holding hands until the 
voice tells me to prepare for the launch. He walks me 
over to the circular metal plate and zips up the neck 
of my jumpsuit securely. "Remember, girl on fire," he 
says, "I'm still betting on you." He kisses my forehead 
and steps back as the glass cylinder slides down 
around me. 

"Thank you," I say, although he probably can't hear 
me. I lift my chin, holding my head high the way he 
always tells me to, and wait for the plate to rise. But 
it doesn't. And it still doesn't. 

I look at Cinna, raising my eyebrows for an 
explanation. He just gives his head a slight shake, as 
perplexed as I am. Why are they delaying this? 

Suddenly the door behind him bursts open and three 
Peacekeepers spring into the room. Two pin Cinna's 
arms behind him and cuff him while the third hits 
him in the temple with such force he's knocked to his 
knees. But they keep hitting him with metal-studded 
gloves, opening gashes on his face and body. I'm 
screaming my head off, banging on the unyielding 
glass, trying to reach him. The Peacekeepers ignore 
me completely as they drag Cinna's limp body from 
the room. All that's left are the smears of blood on the 
floor. 

Sickened and terrified, I feel the plate begin to rise. 
I'm still leaning against the glass when the breeze 
catches my hair and I force myself to straighten up. 
Just in time, too, because the glass is retreating and 
I'm standing free in the arena. Something seems to be 
wrong with my vision. The ground is too bright and 
shiny and keeps undulating. I squint down at my feet 
and see that my metal plate is surrounded by blue 
waves that lap up over my boots. Slowly I raise my 



245 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



eyes and take in the water spreading out in every 
direction. 

I can only form one clear thought. 
This is no place for a girl on fire. 



246 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



PART III 
"THE ENEMY" 



247 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Ladies and gentlemen, let the Seventy-fifth Hunger 
Games begin!" The voice of Claudius Templesmith, 
the Hunger Games announcer, hammers my ears. I 
have less than a minute to get my bearings. Then the 
gong will sound and the tributes will be free to move 
off their metal plates. But move where? 

I can't think straight. The image of Cinna, beaten and 
bloody, consumes me. Where is he now? What are 
they doing to him? Torturing him? Killing him? 
Turning him into an Avox? Obviously his assault was 
staged to unhinge me, the same way Darius's 
presence in my quarters was. And it has unhinged 
me. All I want to do is collapse on my metal plate. But 
I can hardly do that after what I just witnessed. I 
must be strong. I owe it to Cinna, who risked 
everything by undermining President Snow and 
turning my bridal silk into mockingjay plumage. And I 
owe it to the rebels who, emboldened by Cinna's 
example, might be fighting to bring down the Capitol 
at this moment. My refusal to play the Games on the 
Capitol's terms is to be my last act of rebellion. So I 
grit my teeth and will myself to be a player. 

Where are you? I can still make no sense of my 
surroundings. Where are you?! I demand an answer 
from myself and slowly the world comes into focus. 
Blue water. Pink sky. White-hot sun beating down. All 
right, there's the Cornucopia, the shining gold metal 
horn, about forty yards away. At first, it appears to be 
sitting on a circular island. But on closer 
examination, I see the thin strips of land radiating 
from the circle like the spokes on a wheel. I think 
there are ten to twelve, and they seem equidistant 



248 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



from one another. Between the spokes, all is water. 
Water and a pair of tributes. 

That's it, then. There are twelve spokes, each with two 
tributes balanced on metal plates between them. The 
other tribute in my watery wedge is old Woof from 
District 8. He's about as far to my right as the land 
strip on my left. Beyond the water, wherever you look, 
a narrow beach and then dense greenery. I scan the 
circle of tributes, looking for Peeta, but he must be 
blocked from my view by the Cornucopia. 

I catch a handful of water as it washes in and smell 
it. Then I touch the tip of my wet finger to my tongue. 
As I suspected, it's saltwater. Just like the waves 
Peeta and I encountered on our brief tour of the 
beach in District 4. But at least it seems clean. 

There are no boats, no ropes, not even a bit of 
driftwood to cling to. No, there's only one way to get to 
the Cornucopia. When the gong sounds, I don't even 
hesitate before I dive to my left. It's a longer distance 
than I'm used to, and navigating the waves takes a 
little more skill than swimming across my quiet lake 
at home, but my body seems oddly light and I cut 
through the water effortlessly. Maybe it's the salt. I 
pull myself, dripping, onto the land strip and sprint 
down the sandy stretch for the Cornucopia. I can see 
no one else converging from my side, although the 
gold horn blocks a good portion of my view. I don't let 
the thought of adversaries slow me down, though. I'm 
thinking like a Career now, and the first thing I want 
is to get my hands on a weapon. 

Last year, the supplies were spread out quite a 
distance around the Cornucopia, with the most 
valuable closest to the horn. But this year, the booty 
seems to be piled at the twenty-foot-high mouth. My 



249 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



eyes instantly home in on a golden bow just in arm's 
reach and I yank it free. 

There's someone behind me. I'm alerted by, I don't 
know, a soft shift of sand or maybe just a change in 
the air currents. I pull an arrow from the sheath 
that's still wedged in the pile and arm my bow as I 
turn. 

Finnick, glistening and gorgeous, stands a few yards 
away, with a trident poised to attack. A net dangles 
from his other hand. He's smiling a little, but the 
muscles in his upper body are rigid in anticipation. 
"You can swim, too," he says. "Where did you learn 
that in District Twelve?" 

"We have a big bathtub," I answer. 

"You must," he says. "You like the arena?" 

"Not particularly. But you should. They must have 
built it especially for you," I say with an edge of 
bitterness. It seems like it, anyway, with all the water, 
when I bet only a handful of the victors can swim. 
And there was no pool in the Training Center, no 
chance to learn. Either you came in here a swimmer 
or you'd better be a really fast learner. Even 
participation in the initial bloodbath depends on 
being able to cover twenty yards of water. That gives 
District 4 an enormous advantage. 

For a moment we're frozen, sizing each other up, our 
weapons, our skill. Then Finnick suddenly grins. 
"Lucky thing we're allies. Right?" 

Sensing a trap, I'm about to let my arrow fly, hoping it 
finds his heart before the trident impales me, when he 
shifts his hand and something on his wrist catches 
the sunlight. A solid-gold bangle patterned with 



250 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



flames. The same one I remember on Haymitch's wrist 
the morning I began training. I briefly consider that 
Finnick could have stolen it to trick me, but somehow 
I know this isn't the case. Haymitch gave it to him. As 
a signal to me. An order, really. To trust Finnick. 

I can hear other footsteps approaching. I must decide 
at once. "Right!" I snap, because even though 
Haymitch is my mentor and trying to keep me alive, 
this angers me. Why didn't he tell me he'd made this 
arrangement before? Probably because Peeta and I 
had ruled out allies. Now Haymitch has chosen one 
on his own. 

"Duck!" Finnick commands in such a powerful voice, 
so different from his usual seductive purr, that I do. 
His trident goes whizzing over my head and there's a 
sickening sound of impact as it finds its target. The 
man from District 5, the drunk who threw up on the 
sword-fighting floor, sinks to his knees as Finnick 
frees the trident from his chest. "Don't trust One and 
Two," Finnick says. 

There's no time to question this. I work the sheath of 
arrows free. "Each take one side?" I say. He nods, and 
I dart around the pile. About four spokes apart, 
Enobaria and Gloss are just reaching land. Either 
they're slow swimmers or they thought the water 
might be laced with other dangers, which it might 
well be. Sometimes it's not good to consider too many 
scenarios. But now that they're on the sand, they 11 be 
here in a matter of seconds. 

"Anything useful?" I hear Finnick shout. 

I quickly scan the pile on my side and find maces, 
swords, bows and arrows, tridents, knives, spears, 
axes, metallic objects I have no name for... and 
nothing else. 

251 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Weapons!" I call back. "Nothing but weapons!" 

"Same here," he confirms. "Grab what you want and 
let's go!" 

I shoot an arrow at Enobaria, who's gotten in too 
close for comfort, but she's expecting it and dives 
back into the water before it can find its mark. Gloss 
isn't quite as swift, and I sink an arrow into his calf 
as he plunges into the waves. I sling an extra bow and 
a second sheath of arrows over my body, slide two 
long knives and an awl into my belt, and meet up 
with Finnick at the front of the pile. 

"Do something about that, would you?" he says. I see 
Brutus barreling toward us. His belt is undone and 
he has it stretched between his hands as a kind of 
shield. I shoot at him and he manages to block the 
arrow with his belt before it can skewer his liver. 
Where it punctures the belt, a purple liquid spews 
forth, coating his face. As I reload, Brutus flattens on 
the ground, rolls the few feet to the water, and 
submerges. There's a clang of metal falling behind 
me. "Let's clear out," I say to Finnick. 

This last altercation has given Enobaria and Gloss 
time to reach the Cornucopia. Brutus is within 
shooting distance and somewhere, certainly, 
Cashmere is nearby, too. These four classic Careers 
will no doubt have a prior alliance. If I had only my 
own safety to consider, I might be willing to take them 
on with Finnick by my side. But it's Peeta I'm 
thinking about. I spot him now, still stranded on his 
metal plate. I take off and Finnick follows without 
question, as if knowing this will be my next move. 
When I'm as close as I can get, I start removing knives 
from my belt, preparing to swim out to reach him and 
somehow bring him in. 



252 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Finnick drops a hand on my shoulder. "Ill get him." 



Suspicion flickers up inside me. Could this all just be 
a ruse? For Finnick to win my trust and then swim 
out and drown Peeta? "I can," I insist. 

But Finnick has dropped all his weapons to the 
ground. "Better not exert yourself. Not in your 
condition," he says, and reaches down and pats my 
abdomen. 

Oh, right. I'm supposed to be pregnant, I think. While 
I'm trying to think what that means and how I should 
act — maybe throw up or something — Finnick has 
positioned himself at the edge of the water. 

"Cover me," he says. He disappears with a flawless 
dive. 

I raise my bow, warding off any attackers from the 
Cornucopia, but no one seems interested in pursuing 
us. 

Sure enough, Gloss, Cashmere, Enobaria, and Brutus 
have gathered, their pack formed already, picking 
over the weapons. A quick survey of the rest of the 
arena shows that most of the tributes are still trapped 
on their plates. Wait, no, there's someone standing on 
the spoke to my left, the one opposite Peeta. It's Mags. 
But she neither heads for the Cornucopia nor tries to 
flee. Instead she splashes into the water and starts 
paddling toward me, her gray head bobbing above the 
waves. Well, she's old, but I guess after eighty years of 
living in District 4 she can keep afloat. 

Finnick has reached Peeta now and is towing him 
back, one arm across his chest while the other 
propels them through the water with easy strokes. 
Peeta rides along without resisting. I don't know what 



253 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Finnick said or did that convinced him to put his life 
in his hands — showed him the bangle, maybe. Or just 
the sight of me waiting might have been enough. 
When they reach the sand, I help haul Peeta up onto 
dry land. 

"Hello, again," he says, and gives me a kiss. "We've 
got allies." 

"Yes. Just as Haymitch intended," I answer. "Remind 
me, did we make deals with anyone else?" Peeta asks. 

"Only Mags, I think," I say. I nod toward the old 
woman doggedly making her way toward us. 

"Well, I can't leave Mags behind," says Finnick. "She's 
one of the few people who actually likes me." 

"I've got no problem with Mags," I say. "Especially 
now that I see the arena. Het fishhooks are probably 
our best chance of getting a meal." 

"Katniss wanted her on the first day," says Peeta. 

"Katniss has remarkably good judgment," says 
Finnick. With one hand he reaches into the water and 
scoops out Mags like she weighs no more than a 
puppy. She makes some remark that I think includes 
the word "bob," then pats her belt. 

"Look, she's right. Someone figured it out." Finnick 
points to Beetee. He's flailing around in the waves but 
managing to keep his head above water. 

"What?" I say. 

"The belts. They're flotation devices," says Finnick. "I 
mean, you have to propel yourself, but theyll keep 
you from drowning." 



254 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I almost ask Finnick to wait, to get Beetee and Wiress 
and take them with us, but Beetee's three spokes over 
and I can't even see Wiress. For all I know, Finnick 
would kill them as quickly as he did the tribute from 
5, so instead I suggest we move on. I hand Peeta a 
bow, a sheath of arrows, and a knife, keeping the rest 
for myself. But Mags tugs on my sleeve and babbles 
on until I've given the awl to her. Pleased, she clamps 
the handle between her gums and reaches her arms 
up to Finnick. He tosses his net over his shoulder, 
hoists Mags on top of it, grips his tridents in his free 
hand, and we run away from the Cornucopia. 

Where the sand ends, woods begin to rise sharply. No, 
not really woods. At least not the kind I know. Jungle. 
The foreign, almost obsolete word comes to mind. 
Something I heard from another Hunger Games or 
learned from my father. Most of the trees are 
unfamiliar, with smooth trunks and few branches. 
The earth is very black and spongy underfoot, often 
obscured by tangles of vines with colorful blossoms. 
While the sun's hot and bright, the air's warm and 
heavy with moisture, and I get the feeling I will never 
really be dry here. The thin blue fabric of my jumpsuit 
lets the seawater evaporate easily, but it's already 
begun to cling to me with sweat. 

Peeta takes the lead, cutting through the patches of 
dense vegetation with his long knife. I make Finnick 
go second because even though he's the most 
powerful, he's got his hands full with Mags. Besides, 
while he's a whiz with that trident, it's a weapon less 
suited to the jungle than my arrows. It doesn't take 
long, between the steep incline and the heat, to 
become short of breath. Peeta and I have been 
training intensely, though, and Finnick's such an 
amazing physical specimen that even with Mags over 
his shoulder, we climb rapidly for about a mile before 



255 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



he requests a rest. And then I think it's more for 
Mags's sake than his own. 

The foliage has hidden the wheel from sight, so I scale 
a tree with rubbery limbs to get a better view. And 
then wish that I hadn't. 

Around the Cornucopia, the ground appears to be 
bleeding; the water has purple stains. Bodies lie on 
the ground and float in the sea, but at this distance, 
with everyone dressed exactly the same, I can't tell 
who lives or dies. All I can tell is that some of the tiny 
blue figures still battle. Well, what did I think? That 
the victors' chain of locked hands last night would 
result in some sort of universal truce in the arena? 
No, I never believed that. But I guess I had hoped 
people might show some... what? Restraint? 
Reluctance, at least. Before they jumped right into 
massacre mode. And you all knew each other, I think. 
You acted like friends. 

I have only one real friend in here. And he isn't from 
District 4. 

I let the slight, soupy breeze cool my cheeks while I 
come to a decision. Despite the bangle, I should just 
get it over with and shoot Finnick. There's really no 
future in this alliance. And he's too dangerous to let 
go. Now, when we have this tentative trust, may be 
my only chance to kill him. I could easily shoot him in 
the back as we walk. It's despicable, of course, but 
will it be any more despicable if I wait? Know him 
better? Owe him more? No, this is the time. I take one 
last look at the battling figures, the bloody ground, to 
harden my resolve, and then slide to the ground. 

But when I land, I find Finnick's kept pace with my 
thoughts. As if he knows what I have seen and how it 



256 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



will have affected me. He has one of his tridents 
raised in a casually defensive position. 

"What's going on down there, Katniss? Have they all 
joined hands? Taken a vow of nonviolence? Tossed 
the weapons in the sea in defiance of the Capitol?" 
Finnick asks. 

"No," I say. 

"No," Finnick repeats. "Because whatever happened 
in the past is in the past. And no one in this arena 
was a victor by chance." He eyes Peeta for a moment. 
"Except maybe Peeta." 

Finnick knows then what Haymitch and I know. 
About Peeta. Being truly, deep-down better than the 
rest of us. Finnick took out that tribute from 5 
without blinking an eye. And how long did I take to 
turn deadly? I shot to kill when I targeted Enobaria 
and Gloss and Brutus. Peeta would at least have 
attempted negotiations first. Seen if some wider 
alliance was possible. But to what end? Finnick's 
right. I'm right. The people in this arena weren't 
crowned for their compassion. 

I hold his gaze, weighing his speed against my own. 
The time it will take to send an arrow through his 
brain versus the time his trident will reach my body. I 
can see him, waiting for me to make the first move. 
Calculating if he should block first or go directly for 
an attack. I can feel we've both about worked it out 
when Peeta steps deliberately between us. 

"So how many are dead?" he asks. 

Move, you idiot, I think. But he remains planted firmly 
between us. 



257 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Hard to say," I answer. "At least six, I think. And 
they're still fighting." 

"Let's keep moving. We need water," he says. 

So far there's been no sign of a freshwater stream or 
pond, and the saltwater 's undrinkable. Again, I think 
of the last Games, where I nearly died of dehydration. 

"Better find some soon," says Finnick. "We need to be 
undercover when the others come hunting us 
tonight." 

We. Us. Hunting. All right, maybe killing Finnick 
would be a little premature. He's been helpful so far. 
He does have Haymitch's stamp of approval. And who 
knows what the night will hold? If worse comes to 
worst, I can always kill him in his sleep. So I let the 
moment pass. And so does Finnick. 

The absence of water intensifies my thirst. I keep a 
sharp eye out as we continue our trek upward, but 
with no luck. After about another mile, I can see an 
end to the tree line and assume we're reaching the 
crest of the hill. "Maybe well have better luck on the 
other side. Find a spring or something." 

But there is no other side. I know this before anyone 
else, even though I am farthest from the top. My eyes 
catch on a funny, rippling square hanging like a 
warped pane of glass in the air. At first I think it's the 
glare from the sun or the heat shimmering up off the 
ground. But it's fixed in space, not shifting when I 
move. And that's when I connect the square with 
Wiress and Beetee in the Training Center and realize 
what lies before us. My warning cry is just reaching 
my lips when Peeta's knife swings out to slash away 
some vines. 



258 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



There's a sharp zapping sound. For an instant, the 
trees are gone and I see open space over a short 
stretch of bare earth. Then Peeta's flung back from 
the force field, bringing Finnick and Mags to the 
ground. 

I rush over to where he lies, motionless in a web of 
vines. "Peeta?" There's a faint smell of singed hair. I 
call his name again, giving him a little shake, but he's 
unresponsive. My fingers fumble across his lips, 
where there's no warm breath although moments ago 
he was panting. I press my ear against his chest, to 
the spot where I always rest my head, where I know I 
will hear the strong and steady beat of his heart. 

Instead, I find silence. 



259 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



19 



"Peeta!" I scream. I shake him harder, even resort to 
slapping his face, but it's no use. His heart has failed. 
I am slapping emptiness. "Peeta!" 

Finnick props Mags against a tree and pushes me out 
of the way. "Let me." His fingers touch points at 
Peeta's neck, run over the bones in his ribs and 
spine. Then he pinches Peeta's nostrils shut. 

"No!" I yell, hurling myself at Finnick, for surely he 
intends to make certain that Peeta's dead, to keep any 
hope of life from returning to him. Finnick's hand 
comes up and hits me so hard, so squarely in the 
chest that I go flying back into a nearby tree trunk. 
I'm stunned for a moment, by the pain, by trying to 
regain my wind, as I see Finnick close off Peeta's nose 
again. From where I sit, I pull an arrow, whip the 
notch into place, and am about to let it fly when I'm 
stopped by the sight of Finnick kissing Peeta. And it's 
so bizarre, even for Finnick, that I stay my hand. No, 
he's not kissing him. He's got Peeta's nose blocked off 
but his mouth tilted open, and he's blowing air into 
his lungs. I can see this, I can actually see Peeta's 
chest rising and falling. Then Finnick unzips the top 
of Peeta's jumpsuit and begins to pump the spot over 
his heart with the heels of his hands. Now that I've 
gotten through my shock, I understand what he's 
trying to do. 

Once in a blue moon, I've seen my mother try 
something similar, but not often. If your heart fails in 
District 12, it's unlikely your family could get you to 
my mother in time, anyway. So her usual patients are 
burned or wounded or ill. Or starving, of course. 



260 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



But Finnick's world is different. Whatever he's doing, 
he's done it before. There's a very set rhythm and 
method. And I find the arrow tip sinking to the 
ground as I lean in to watch, desperately, for some 
sign of success. Agonizing minutes drag past as my 
hopes diminish. Around the time that I'm deciding it's 
too late, that Peeta's dead, moved on, unreachable 
forever, he gives a small cough and Finnick sits back. 

I leave my weapons in the dirt as I fling myself at him. 
"Peeta?" I say softly. I brush the damp blond strands 
of hair back from his forehead, find the pulse 
drumming against my fingers at his neck. 

His lashes flutter open and his eyes meet mine. 
"Careful," he says weakly. "There's a force field up 
ahead." 

I laugh, but there are tears running down my cheeks. 

"Must be a lot stronger than the one on the Training 
Center roof," he says. "I'm all right, though. Just a 
little shaken." 

"You were dead! Your heart stopped!" I burst out, 
before really considering if this is a good idea. I clap 
my hand over my mouth because I'm starting to make 
those awful choking sounds that happen when I sob. 

"Well, it seems to be working now," he says. "It's all 
right, Katniss." I nod my head but the sounds aren't 
stopping. 

"Katniss?" Now Peeta's worried about me, which adds 
to the insanity of it all. 

"It's okay. It's just her hormones," says Finnick. 
"From the baby." I look up and see him, sitting back 
on his knees but still panting a bit from the climb and 
261 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



the heat and the effort of bringing Peeta back from 
the dead. 



"No. It's not — " I get out, but I'm cut off by an even 
more hysterical round of sobbing that seems only to 
confirm what Finnick said about the baby. He meets 
my eyes and I glare at him through my tears. It's 
stupid, I know, that his efforts make me so vexed. All 
I wanted was to keep Peeta alive, and I couldn't and 
Finnick could, and I should be nothing but grateful. 
And I am. But I am also furious because it means 
that I will never stop owing Finnick Odair. Ever. So 
how can I kill him in his sleep? 

I expect to see a smug or sarcastic expression on his 
face, but his look is strangely quizzical. He glances 
between Peeta and me, as if trying to figure something 
out, then gives his head a slight shake as if to clear it. 
"How are you?" he asks Peeta. "Do you think you can 
move on?" 

"No, he has to rest," I say. My nose is running like 
crazy and I don't even have a shred of fabric to use as 
a handkerchief. Mags rips off a handful of hanging 
moss from a tree limb and gives it to me. I'm too 
much of a mess to even question it. I blow my nose 
loudly and mop the tears off my face. It's nice, the 
moss. Absorbent and surprisingly soft. 

I notice a gleam of gold on Peeta's chest. I reach out 
and retrieve the disk that hangs from a chain around 
his neck. My mockingjay has been engraved on it. "Is 
this your token?" I ask. 

"Yes. Do you mind that I used your mockingjay? I 
wanted us to match," he says. 

"No, of course I don't mind." I force a smile. Peeta 
showing up in the arena wearing a mockingjay is both 



262 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



a blessing and a curse. On the one hand, it should 
give a boost to the rebels in the district. On the other, 
it's hard to imagine President Snow will overlook it, 
and that makes the job of keeping Peeta alive harder. 

"So you want to make camp here, then?" Finnick 
asks. 

"I don't think that's an option," Peeta answers. 
"Staying here. With no water. No protection. I feel all 
right, really. If we could just go slowly." 

"Slowly would be better than not at all." Finnick helps 
Peeta to his feet while I pull myself together. Since I 
got up this morning I've watched Cinna beaten to a 
pulp, landed in another arena, and seen Peeta die. 
Still, I'm glad Finnick keeps playing the pregnancy 
card for me, because from a sponsor's point of view, 
I'm not handling things all that well. 

I check over my weapons, which I know are in perfect 
condition, because it makes me seem more in control. 
"Ill take the lead," I announce. 

Peeta starts to object but Finnick cuts him off. "No, 
let her do it." He frowns at me. "You knew that force 
field was there, didn't you? Right at the last second? 
You started to give a warning." I nod. "How did you 
know?" 

I hesitate. To reveal that I know Beetee and Wiress's 
trick of recognizing a force field could be dangerous. I 
don't know if the Gamemakers made note of that 
moment during training when the two pointed it out 
to me or not. One way or the other, I have a very 
valuable piece of information. And if they know I have 
it, they might do something to alter the force field so I 
can't see the aberration anymore. So I lie. "I don't 
know. It's almost as if I could hear it. Listen." We all 



263 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



become still. There's the sound of insects, birds, the 
breeze in the foliage. 

"I don't hear anything," says Peeta. 

"Yes," I insist, "it's like when the fence around District 
Twelve is on, only much, much quieter." Everyone 
listens again intently. I do, too, although there's 
nothing to hear. "There!" I say. "Can't you hear it? It's 
coming from right where Peeta got shocked." 

"I don't hear it, either," says Finnick. "But if you do, 
by all means, take the lead." 

I decide to play this for all it's worth. "That's weird," I 
say. I turn my head from side to side as if puzzled. "I 
can only hear it out of my left ear." 

"The one the doctors reconstructed?" asks Peeta. 

"Yeah," I say, then give a shrug. "Maybe they did a 
better job than they thought. You know, sometimes I 
do hear funny things on that side. Things you 
wouldn't ordinarily think have a sound. Like insect 
wings. Or snow hitting the ground." Perfect. Now all 
the attention will turn to the surgeons who fixed my 
deaf ear after the Games last year, and they'll have to 
explain why I can hear like a bat. 

"You," says Mags, nudging me forward, so I take the 
lead. Since we're to be moving slowly, Mags prefers to 
walk with the aid of a branch Finnick quickly 
fashions into a cane for her. He makes a staff for 
Peeta as well, which is good because, despite his 
protestations, I think all Peeta really wants to do is lie 
down. Finnick brings up the rear, so at least someone 
alert has our backs. 



264 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I walk with the force field on my left, because that's 
supposed to be the side with my superhuman ear. 
But since that's all made up, I cut down a bunch of 
hard nuts that hang like grapes from a nearby tree 
and toss them ahead of me as I go. It's good I do, too, 
because I have a feeling I'm missing the patches that 
indicate the force field more often than I'm spotting 
them. Whenever a nut hits the force field, there's a 
puff of smoke before the nut lands, blackened and 
with a cracked shell, on the ground at my feet. 

After a few minutes I become aware of a smacking 
sound behind me and turn to see Mags peeling the 
shell off one of the nuts and popping it in her already- 
full mouth. "Mags!" I cry. "Spit that out. It could be 
poisonous." 

She mumbles something and ignores me, licking her 
lips with apparent relish. I look to Finnick for help 
but he just laughs. "I guess well find out," he says. 

I go forward, wondering about Finnick, who saved old 
Mags but will let her eat strange nuts. Who Haymitch 
has stamped with his seal of approval. Who brought 
Peeta back from the dead. Why didn't he just let him 
die? He would have been blameless. I never would 
have guessed it was in his power to revive him. Why 
could he possibly have wanted to save Peeta? And 
why was he so determined to team up with me? 
Willing to kill me, too, if it comes to that. But leaving 
the choice of if we fight to me. 

I keep walking, tossing my nuts, sometimes catching 
a glimpse of the force field, trying to press to the left 
to find a spot where we can break through, get away 
from the Cornucopia, and hopefully find water. But 
after another hour or so of this I realize it's futile. 
We're not making any progress to the left. In fact, the 
force field seems to be herding us along a curved 
265 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



path. I stop and look back at Mags's limping form, the 
sheen of sweat on Peeta's face. "Let's take a break," I 
say. "I need to get another look from above." 

The tree I choose seems to jut higher into the air than 
the others. I make my way up the twisting boughs, 
staying as close to the trunk as possible. No telling 
how easily these rubbery branches will snap. Still I 
climb beyond good sense because there's something I 
have to see. As I cling to a stretch of trunk no wider 
than a sapling, swaying back and forth in the humid 
breeze, my suspicions are confirmed. There's a reason 
we can't turn to the left, will never be able to. From 
this precarious vantage point, I can see the shape of 
the whole arena for the first time. A perfect circle. 
With a perfect wheel in the middle. The sky above the 
circumference of the jungle is tinged a uniform pink. 
And I think I can make out one or two of those wavy 
squares, chinks in the armor, Wiress and Beetee 
called them, because they reveal what was meant to 
be hidden and are therefore a weakness. Just to make 
absolutely sure, I shoot an arrow into the empty 
space above the tree line. There's a spurt of light, a 
flash of real blue sky, and the arrow's thrown back 
into the jungle. I climb down to give the others the 
bad news. 

"The force field has us trapped in a circle. A dome, 
really. I don't know how high it goes. There's the 
Cornucopia, the sea, and then the jungle all around. 
Very exact. Very symmetrical. And not very large," I 
say. 

"Did you see any water?" asks Finnick. 

"Only the saltwater where we started the Games," I 
say. 



266 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"There must be some other source," says Peeta, 
frowning. "Or well all be dead in a matter of days." 

"Well, the foliage is thick. Maybe there are ponds or 
springs somewhere," I say doubtfully. I instinctively 
feel the Capitol might want these unpopular Games 
over as soon as possible. Plutarch Heavensbee might 
have already been given orders to knock us off. "At 
any rate, there's no point in trying to find out what's 
over the edge of this hill, because the answer is 
nothing." 

"There must be drinkable water between the force 
field and the wheel," Peeta insists. We all know what 
this means. Heading back down. Heading back to the 
Careers and the bloodshed. With Mags hardly able to 
walk and Peeta too weak to fight. 

We decide to move down the slope a few hundred 
yards and continue circling. See if maybe there's 
some water at that level. I stay in the lead, 
occasionally chucking a nut to my left, but we're well 
out of range of the force field now. The sun beats 
down on us, turning the air to steam, playing tricks 
on our eyes. By midafternoon, it's clear Peeta and 
Mags can't go on. 

Finnick chooses a campsite about ten yards below the 
force field, saying we can use it as a weapon by 
deflecting our enemies into it if attacked. Then he and 
Mags pull blades of the sharp grass that grows in five- 
foot-high tufts and begin to weave them together into 
mats. Since Mags seems to have no ill effects from the 
nuts, Peeta collects bunches of them and fries them 
by bouncing them off the force field. He methodically 
peels off the shells, piling the meats on a leaf. I stand 
guard, fidgety and hot and raw with the emotions of 
the day. 



267 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Thirsty. I am so thirsty. Finally I can't stand it 
anymore. "Finnick, why don't you stand guard and 111 
hunt around some more for water," I say. No one's 
thrilled with the idea of me going off alone, but the 
threat of dehydration hangs over us. 

"Don't worry, I won't go far," I promise Peeta. "I'll go, 
too," he says. 

"No, I'm going to do some hunting if I can," I tell him. 
I don't add, "And you can't come because you're too 
loud." But it's implied. He would both scare off prey 
and endanger me with his heavy tread. "I won't be 
long." 

I move stealthily through the trees, happy to find that 
the ground lends itself to soundless footsteps. I work 
my way down at a diagonal, but I find nothing except 
more lush, green plant life. 

The sound of the cannon brings me to a halt. The 
initial bloodbath at the Cornucopia must be over. The 
death toll of the tributes is now available. I count the 
shots, each representing one dead victor. Eight. Not 
as many as last year. But it seems like more since I 
know most of their names. 

Suddenly weak, I lean against a tree to rest, feeling 
the heat draw the moisture from my body like a 
sponge. Already, swallowing is difficult and fatigue is 
creeping up on me. I try rubbing my hand across my 
belly, hoping some sympathetic pregnant woman will 
become my sponsor and Haymitch can send in some 
water. No luck. I sink to the ground. 

In my stillness, I begin to notice the animals: strange 
birds with brilliant plumage, tree lizards with 
flickering blue tongues, and something that looks like 
a cross between a rat and a possum clinging on the 
268 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



branches close to the trunk. I shoot one of the latter 
out of a tree to get a closer look. 

It's ugly, all right, a big rodent with a fuzz of mottled 
gray fur and two wicked-looking gnawing teeth 
protruding over its lower lip. As I'm gutting and 
skinning it, I notice something else. Its muzzle is wet. 
Like an animal that's been drinking from a stream. 
Excited, I start at its home tree and move slowly out 
in a spiral. It can't be far, the creature's water source. 

Nothing. I find nothing. Not so much as a dewdrop. 
Eventually, because I know Peeta will be worried 
about me, I head back to the camp, hotter and more 
frustrated than ever. 

When I arrive, I see the others have transformed the 
place. Mags and Finnick have created a hut of sorts 
out of the grass mats, open on one side but with three 
walls, a floor, and a roof. Mags has also plaited 
several bowls that Peeta has filled with roasted nuts. 
Their faces turn to me hopefully, but I give my head a 
shake. "No. No water. It's out there, though. He knew 
where it was," I say, hoisting the skinned rodent up 
for all to see. "He'd been drinking recently when I shot 
him out of a tree, but I couldn't find his source. I 
swear, I covered every inch of ground in a thirty-yard 
radius." 

"Can we eat him?" Peeta asks. 

"I don't know for sure. But his meat doesn't look that 
different from a squirrel's. He ought to be cooked..." I 
hesitate as I think of trying to start a fire out here 
from complete scratch. Even if I succeed, there's the 
smoke to think about. We're all so close together in 
this arena, there's no chance of hiding it. 



269 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Peeta has another idea. He takes a cube of rodent 
meat, skewers it on the tip of a pointed stick, and lets 
it fall into the force field. There's a sharp sizzle and 
the stick flies back. The chunk of meat is blackened 
on the outside but well cooked inside. We give him a 
round of applause, then quickly stop, remembering 
where we are. 

The white sun sinks in the rosy sky as we gather in 
the hut. I'm still leery about the nuts, but Finnick 
says Mags recognized them from another Games. I 
didn't bother spending time at the edible-plants 
station in training because it was so effortless for me 
last year. Now I wish I had. For surely there would 
have been some of the unfamiliar plants surrounding 
me. And I might have guessed a bit more about where 
I was headed. Mags seems fine, though, and she's 
been eating the nuts for hours. So I pick one up and 
take a small bite. It has a mild, slightly sweet flavor 
that reminds me of a chestnut. I decide it's all right. 
The rodent's strong and gamey but surprisingly juicy. 
Really, it's not a bad meal for our first night in the 
arena. If only we had something to wash it down with. 

Finnick asks a lot of questions about the rodent, 
which we decide to call a tree rat. How high was it, 
how long did I watch it before I shot, and what was it 
doing? I don't remember it doing much of anything. 
Snuffling around for insects or something. 

I'm dreading the night. At least the tightly woven 
grass offers some protection from whatever slinks 
across the jungle floor after hours. But a short time 
before the sun slips below the horizon, a pale white 
moon rises, making things just visible enough. Our 
conversation trails off because we know what's 
coming. We position ourselves in a line at the mouth 
of the hut and Peeta slips his hand into mine. 



270 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



The sky brightens when the seal of the Capitol 
appears as if floating in space. As I listen to the 
strains of the anthem I think, It will be harder for 
Finnick and Mags. But it turns out to be plenty hard 
for me as well. Seeing the faces of the eight dead 
victors projected into the sky. 

The man from District 5, the one Finnick took out 
with his trident, is the first to appear. That means 
that all the tributes in 1 through 4 are alive — the four 
Careers, Beetee and Wiress, and, of course, Mags and 
Finnick. The man from District 5 is followed by the 
male morphling from 6, Cecelia and Woof from 8, 
both from 9, the woman from 10, and Seeder from 11. 
The Capitol seal is back with a final bit of music and 
then the sky goes dark except for the moon. 

No one speaks. I can't pretend I knew any of them 
well. But I'm thinking of those three kids hanging on 
to Cecelia when they took her away. Seeder's 
kindness to me at our meeting. Even the thought of 
the glazed-eyed morphling painting my cheeks with 
yellow flowers gives me a pang. All dead. All gone. 

I don't know how long we might have sat here if it 
weren't for the arrival of the silver parachute, which 
glides down through the foliage to land before us. No 
one reaches for it. 

"Whose is it, do you think?" I say finally. 

"No telling," says Finnick. "Why don't we let Peeta 
claim it, since he died today?" 

Peeta unties the cord and flattens out the circle of 
silk. On the parachute sits a small metal object that I 
can't place. "What is it?" I ask. No one knows. We 
pass it from hand to hand, taking turns examining it. 
It's a hollow metal tube, tapered slightly at one end. 
271 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



On the other end a small lip curves downward. It's 
vaguely familiar. A part that could have fallen off a 
bicycle, a curtain rod, anything, really. 

Peeta blows on one end to see if it makes a sound. It 
doesn't. Finnick slides his pinkie into it, testing it out 
as a weapon. Useless. 

"Can you fish with it, Mags?" I ask. Mags, who can 
fish with almost anything, shakes her head and 
grunts. 

I take it and roll it back and forth on my palm. Since 
we're allies, Haymitch will be working with the 
District 4 mentors. He had a hand in choosing this 
gift. That means it's valuable. Lifesaving, even. I think 
back to last year, when I wanted water so badly, but 
he wouldn't send it because he knew I could find it if I 
tried. Haymitch 's gifts, or lack thereof, carry weighty 
messages. I can almost hear him growling at me, Use 
your brain if you have one. What is it? 

I wipe the sweat from my eyes and hold the gift out in 
the moonlight. I move it this way and that, viewing it 
from different angles, covering portions and then 
revealing them. Trying to make it divulge its purpose 
to me. Finally, in frustration, I jam one end into the 
dirt. "I give up. Maybe if we hook up with Beetee or 
Wiress they can figure it out. 

I stretch out, pressing my hot cheek on the grass mat, 
staring at the thing in aggravation. Peeta rubs a tense 
spot between my shoulders and I let myself relax a 
little. I wonder why this place hasn't cooled off at all 
now that the sun's gone down. I wonder what's going 
on back home. 

Prim. My mother. Gale. Madge. I think of them 

watching me from home. At least I hope they're at 

272 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



home. Not taken into custody by Thread. Being 
punished as Cinna is. As Darius is. Punished because 
of me. Everybody. 

I begin to ache for them, for my district, for my 
woods. A decent woods with sturdy hardwood trees, 
plentiful food, game that isn't creepy. Rushing 
streams. Cool breezes. No, cold winds to blow this 
stifling heat away. I conjure up such a wind in my 
mind, letting it freeze my cheeks and numb my 
fingers, and all at once, the piece of metal half buried 
in the black earth has a name. 

"A spile!" I exclaim, sitting bolt upright. 

"What?" asks Finnick. 

I wrestle the thing from the ground and brush it 
clean. Cup my hand around the tapered end, 
concealing it, and look at the lip. Yes, I've seen one of 
these before. On a cold, windy day long ago, when I 
was out in the woods with my father. Inserted snugly 
into a hole drilled in the side of a maple. A pathway 
for the sap to follow as it flowed into our bucket. 
Maple syrup could make even our dull bread a treat. 
After my father died, I didn't know what happened to 
the handful of spiles he had. Hidden out in the woods 
somewhere, probably. Never to be found. 

"It's a spile. Sort of like a faucet. You put it in a tree 
and sap comes out." I look at the sinewy green trunks 
around me. "Well, the right sort of tree." 

"Sap?" asks Finnick. They don't have the right kind of 
trees by the sea, either. 

"To make syrup," says Peeta. "But there must be 
something else inside these trees." 



273 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



We're all on our feet at once. Our thirst. The lack of 
springs. The tree rat's sharp front teeth and wet 
muzzle. There can only be one thing worth having 
inside these trees. Finnick goes to hammer the spile 
into the green bark of a massive tree with a rock, but 
I stop him. "Wait. You might damage it. We need to 
drill a hole first," I say. 

There's nothing to drill with, so Mags offers her awl 
and Peeta drives it straight into the bark, burying the 
spike two inches deep. He and Finnick take turns 
opening up the hole with the awl and the knives until 
it can hold the spile. I wedge it in carefully and we all 
stand back in anticipation. 

At first nothing happens. Then a drop of water rolls 
down the lip and lands in Mags's palm. She licks it off 
and holds out her hand for more. 

By wiggling and adjusting the spile, we get a thin 
stream running out. We take turns holding our 
mouths under the tap, wetting our parched tongues. 
Mags brings over a basket, and the grass is so tightly 
woven it holds water. We fill the basket and pass it 
around, taking deep gulps and, later, luxuriously, 
splashing our faces clean. Like everything here, the 
water's on the warm side, but this is no time to be 
picky. 

Without our thirst to distract us, we're all aware of 
how exhausted we are and make preparations for the 
night. Last year, I always tried to have my gear ready 
in case I had to make a speedy retreat in the night. 
This year, there's no backpack to prepare. Just my 
weapons, which won't leave my grasp, anyway. Then I 
think of the spile and wrest it from the tree trunk. I 
strip a tough vine of its leaves, thread it through the 
hollow center, and tie the spile securely to my belt. 



274 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Finnick offers to take the first watch and I let him, 
knowing it has to be one of the two of us until Peeta's 
rested up. I lie down beside Peeta on the floor of the 
hut, telling Finnick to wake me when he's tired. 
Instead I find myself jarred from sleep a few hours 
later by what seems to be the tolling of a bell. Bong! 
Bong! It's not exactly like the one they ring in the 
Justice Building on New Year's but close enough for 
me to recognize it. Peeta and Mags sleep through it, 
but Finnick has the same look of attentiveness I feel. 
The tolling stops. 

"I counted twelve," he says. 

I nod. Twelve. What does that signify? One ring for 
each district? Maybe. But why? "Mean anything, do 
you think?" 

"No idea," he says. 

We wait for further instructions, maybe a message 
from Claudius Templesmith. An invitation to a feast. 
The only thing of note appears in the distance. A 
dazzling bolt of electricity strikes a towering tree and 
then a lightning storm begins. I guess it's an 
indication of rain, of a water source for those who 
don't have mentors as smart as Haymitch. 

"Go to sleep, Finnick. It's my turn to watch, anyway," 
I say. 

Finnick hesitates, but no one can stay awake forever. 
He settles down at the mouth of the hut, one hand 
gripped around a trident, and drifts into a restless 
sleep. 

I sit with my bow loaded, watching the jungle, which 
is ghostly pale and green in the moonlight. After an 
hour or so, the lightning stops. I can hear the rain 



275 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



coming in, though, pattering on the leaves a few 
hundred yards away. I keep waiting for it to reach us 
but it never does. 

The sound of the cannon startles me, although it 
makes little impression on my sleeping companions. 
There's no point in awakening them for this. Another 
victor dead. I don't even allow myself to wonder who it 
is. 

The elusive rain shuts off suddenly, like the storm did 
last year in the arena. 

Moments after it stops, I see the fog sliding softly in 
from the direction of the recent downpour. Just a 
reaction. Cool rain on the steaming ground, I think. It 
continues to approach at a steady pace. Tendrils 
reach forward and then curl like fingers, as if they are 
pulling the rest behind them. As I watch, I feel the 
hairs on my neck begin to rise. Something's wrong 
with this fog. The progression of the front line is too 
uniform to be natural. And if it's not natural... 

A sickeningly sweet odor begins to invade my nostrils 
and I reach for the others, shouting for them to wake 
up. 

In the few seconds it takes to rouse them, I begin to 
blister. 



276 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Tiny, searing stabs. Wherever the droplets of mist 
touch my skin. 

"Run!" I scream at the others. "Run!" 

Finnick snaps awake instantly, rising to counter an 
enemy. But when he sees the wall of fog, he tosses a 
still-sleeping Mags onto his back and takes off. Peeta 
is on his feet but not as alert. I grab his arm and 
begin to propel him through the jungle after Finnick. 

"What is it? What is it?" he says in bewilderment. 

"Some kind of fog. Poisonous gas. Hurry, Peeta!" I 
urge. I can tell that however much he denied it during 
the day, the aftereffects of hitting the force field have 
been significant. He's slow, much slower than usual. 
And the tangle of vines and undergrowth, which 
unbalance me occasionally, trip him at every step. 

I look back at the wall of fog extending in a straight 
line as far as I can see in either direction. A terrible 
impulse to flee, to abandon Peeta and save myself, 
shoots through me. It would be so simple, to run full 
out, perhaps to even climb a tree above the fog line, 
which seems to top out at about forty feet. I 
remember how I did just this when the muttations 
appeared in the last Games. Took off and only 
thought of Peeta when I'd reached the Cornucopia. 
But this time, I trap my terror, push it down, and stay 
by his side. This time my survival isn't the goal. 
Peeta's is. I think of the eyes glued to the television 
screens in the districts, seeing if I will run, as the 
Capitol wishes, or hold my ground. 



277 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I lock my fingers tightly into his and say, "Watch my 
feet. Just try to step where I step." It helps. We seem 
to move a little faster, but never enough to afford a 
rest, and the mist continues to lap at our heels. 
Droplets spring free of the body of vapor. They burn, 
but not like fire. Less a sense of heat and more of 
intense pain as the chemicals find our flesh, cling to 
it, and burrow down through the layers of skin. Our 
jumpsuits are no help at all. We may as well be 
dressed in tissue paper, for all the protection they 
give. 

Finnick, who bounded off initially, stops when he 
realizes we're having problems. But this is not a thing 
you can fight, only evade. He shouts encouragement, 
trying to move us along, and the sound of his voice 
acts as a guide, though little more. 

Peeta's artificial leg catches in a knot of creepers and 
he sprawls forward before I can catch him. As I help 
him up, I become aware of something scarier than the 
blisters, more debilitating than the burns. The left 
side of his face has sagged, as if every muscle in it 
has died. The lid droops, almost concealing his eye. 
His mouth twists in an odd angle toward the ground. 
"Peeta — " I begin. And that's when I feel the spasms 
run up my arm. 

Whatever chemical laces the fog does more than 
burn — it targets our nerves. A whole new kind of fear 
shoots through me and I yank Peeta forward, which 
only causes him to stumble again. By the time I get 
him to his feet, both of my arms are twitching 
uncontrollably. The fog has moved in on us, the body 
of it less than a yard away. Something is wrong with 
Peeta's legs; he's trying to walk but they move in a 
spastic, puppetlike fashion. 



278 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I feel him lurch forward and realize Finnick has come 
back for us and is hauling Peeta along. I wedge my 
shoulder, which still seems under my control, under 
Peeta's arm and do my best to keep up with Finnick's 
rapid pace. We put about ten yards between us and 
the fog when Finnick stops. 

"It's no good. I'll have to carry him. Can you take 
Mags?" he asks me. 

"Yes," I say stoutly, although my heart sinks. It's true 
that Mags can't weigh more than about seventy 
pounds, but I'm not very big myself. Still, I'm sure I've 
carried heavier loads. If only my arms would stop 
jumping around. I squat down and she positions 
herself over my shoulder, the way she rides on 
Finnick. I slowly straighten my legs and, with my 
knees locked, I can manage her. Finnick has Peeta 
slung across his back now and we move forward, 
Finnick leading, me following in the trail he breaks 
through the vines. 

On the fog comes, silent and steady and flat, except 
for the grasping tendrils. Although my instinct is to 
run directly away from it, I realize Finnick is moving 
at a diagonal down the hill. He's trying to keep a 
distance from the gas while steering us toward the 
water that surrounds the Cornucopia. Yes, water, I 
think as the acid droplets bore deeper into me. Now 
I'm so thankful I didn't kill Finnick, because how 
would I have gotten Peeta out of here alive? So 
thankful to have someone else on my side, even if it's 
only temporarily. 

It's not Mags's fault when I begin falling. She's doing 
everything she can to be an easy passenger, but the 
fact is, there is only so much weight I can handle. 
Especially now that my right leg seems to be going 
stiff. The first two times I crash to the ground, I 
279 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



manage to make it back on my feet, but the third 
time, I cannot get my leg to cooperate. As I struggle to 
get up, it gives out and Mags rolls off onto the ground 
before me. I flail around, trying to use vines and 
trunks to right myself. 

Finnick's back by my side, Peeta hanging over him. 
"It's no use," I say. "Can you take them both? Go on 
ahead, I'll catch up." A somewhat doubtful proposal, 
but I say it with as much surety as I can muster. 

I can see Finnick's eyes, green in the moonlight. I can 
see them as clear as day. Almost like a cat's, with a 
strange reflective quality. Maybe because they are 
shiny with tears. "No," he says. "I can't carry them 
both. My arms aren't working." It's true. His arms jerk 
uncontrollably at his sides. His hands are empty. Of 
his three tridents, only one remains, and it's in 
Peeta's hands. "I'm sorry, Mags. I can't do it." 

What happens next is so fast, so senseless, I can't 
even move to stop it. Mags hauls herself up, plants a 
kiss on Finnick's lips, and then hobbles straight into 
the fog. Immediately, her body is seized by wild 
contortions and she falls to the ground in a horrible 
dance. 

I want to scream, but my throat is on fire. I take one 
futile step in her direction when I hear the cannon 
blast, know her heart has stopped, that she is dead. 
"Finnick?" I call out hoarsely, but he has already 
turned from the scene, already continued his retreat 
from the fog. Dragging my useless leg behind me, I 
stagger after him, having no idea what else to do. 

Time and space lose meaning as the fog seems to 
invade my brain, muddling my thoughts, making 
everything unreal. Some deep-rooted animal desire for 
survival keeps me stumbling after Finnick and Peeta, 
280 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



continuing to move, although I'm probably dead 
already. Parts of me are dead, or clearly dying. And 
Mags is dead. This is something I know, or maybe 
just think I know, because it makes no sense at all. 

Moonlight glinting on Finnick's bronze hair, beads of 
searing pain peppering me, a leg turned to wood. I 
follow Finnick until he collapses on the ground, Peeta 
still on top of him. I seem to have no ability to stop 
my own forward motion and simply propel myself 
onward until I trip over their prone bodies, just one 
more on the heap. This is where and how and when 
we all die, I think. But the thought is abstract and far 
less alarming than the current agonies of my body. I 
hear Finnick groan and manage to drag myself off the 
others. Now I can see the wall of fog, which has taken 
on a pearly white quality. Maybe it's my eyes playing 
tricks, or the moonlight, but the fog seems to be 
transforming. Yes, it's becoming thicker, as if it has 
pressed up against a glass window and is being forced 
to condense. I squint harder and realize the fingers no 
longer protrude from it. In fact, it has stopped moving 
forward entirely. Like other horrors I have witnessed 
in the arena, it has reached the end of its territory. 
Either that or the Gamemakers have decided not to 
kill us just yet. 

"It's stopped," I try to say, but only an awful croaking 
sound comes from my swollen mouth. "It's stopped," I 
say again, and this time I must be clearer, because 
both Peeta and Finnick turn their heads to the fog. It 
begins to rise upward now, as if being slowly 
vacuumed into the sky. We watch until it has all been 
sucked away and not the slightest wisp remains. 

Peeta rolls off Finnick, who turns over onto his back. 
We lie there gasping, twitching, our minds and bodies 
invaded by the poison. After a few minutes pass, 
Peeta vaguely gestures upward. "Mon-hees." I look up 
281 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



and spot a pair of what I guess are monkeys. I have 
never seen a live monkey — there's nothing like that in 
our woods at home. But I must have seen a picture, 
or one in the Games, because when I see the 
creatures, the same word comes to my mind. I think 
these have orange fur, although it's hard to tell, and 
are about half the size of a full-grown human. I take 
the monkeys for a good sign. Surely they would not 
hang around if the air was deadly. For a while, we 
quietly observe one another, humans and monkeys. 
Then Peeta struggles to his knees and crawls down 
the slope. We all crawl, since walking now seems as 
remarkable a feat as flying; we crawl until the vines 
turn to a narrow strip of sandy beach and the warm 
water that surrounds the Cornucopia laps our faces. I 
jerk back as if I've touched an open flame. 

Rubbing salt in a wound. For the first time I truly 
appreciate the expression, because the salt in the 
water makes the pain of my wounds so blinding I 
nearly black out. But there's another sensation, of 
drawing out. I experiment by gingerly placing only my 
hand in the water. Torturous, yes, but then less so. 
And through the blue layer of water, I see a milky 
substance leaching out of the wounds on my skin. As 
the whiteness diminishes, so does the pain. I 
unbuckle my belt and strip off my jumpsuit, which is 
little more than a perforated rag. My shoes and 
undergarments are inexplicably unaffected. Little by 
little, one small portion of a limb at a time, I soak the 
poison out of my wounds. Peeta seems to be doing the 
same. But Finnick backed away from the water at 
first touch and lies facedown on the sand, either 
unwilling or unable to purge himself. 

Finally, when I have survived the worst, opening my 
eyes underwater, sniffing water into my sinuses and 
snorting it out, and even gargling repeatedly to wash 
out my throat, I'm functional enough to help Finnick. 
282 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Some feeling has returned to my leg, but my arms are 
still riddled with spasms. I can't drag Finnick into the 
water, and possibly the pain would kill him, anyway. 
So I scoop up shaky handfuls and empty them on his 
fists. Since he's not underwater, the poison comes out 
of his wounds just as it went in, in wisps of fog that I 
take great care to steer clear of. Peeta recovers 
enough to help me. He cuts away Finnick's jumpsuit. 
Somewhere he finds two shells that work much better 
than our hands do. We concentrate on soaking 
Finnick's arms first, since they have been so badly 
damaged, and even though a lot of white stuff pours 
out of them, he doesn't notice. He just lies there, eyes 
shut, giving an occasional moan. 

I look around with growing awareness of how 
dangerous a position we're in. It's night, yes, but this 
moon gives off too much light for concealment. We're 
lucky no one's attacked us yet. We could see them 
coming from the Cornucopia, but if all four Careers 
attacked, they'd overpower us. If they didn't spot us 
at first, Finnick's moans would give us away soon. 

"We've got to get more of him into the water," I 
whisper. But we can't put him in face-first, not while 
he's in this condition. Peeta nods to Finnick's feet. We 
each take one, pull him one hundred and eighty 
degrees around, and start to drag him into the 
saltwater. Just a few inches at a time. His ankles. 
Wait a few minutes. Up to his midcalf. Wait. His 
knees. Clouds of white swirl out from his flesh and he 
groans. We continue to detoxify him, bit by bit. What I 
find is that the longer I sit in the water, the better I 
feel. Not just my skin, but my brain and muscle 
control continue to improve. I can see Peeta's face 
beginning to return to normal, his eyelid opening, the 
grimace leaving his mouth. 



283 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Finnick slowly begins to revive. His eyes open, focus 
on us, and register awareness that he's being helped. 
I rest his head on my lap and we let him soak about 
ten minutes with everything immersed from the neck 
down. Peeta and I exchange a smile as Finnick lifts 
his arms above the seawater. 

"There's just your head left, Finnick. That's the worst 
part, but youll feel much better after, if you can bear 
it," Peeta says. We help him to sit up and let him grip 
our hands as he purges his eyes and nose and 
mouth. His throat is still too raw to speak. 

"I'm going to try to tap a tree," I say. My fingers 
fumble at my belt and find the spile still hanging from 
its vine. 

"Let me make the hole first," says Peeta. "You stay 
with him. You're the healer." 

That's a joke, I think. But I don't say it out loud, since 
Finnick has enough to deal with. He got the worst of 
the fog, although I'm not sure why. Maybe because 
he's the biggest or maybe because he had to exert 
himself the most. And then, of course, there's Mags. I 
still don't understand what happened there. Why he 
essentially abandoned her to carry Peeta. Why she 
not only didn't question it, but ran straight to her 
death without a moment's hesitation. Was it because 
she was so old that her days were numbered, 
anyway? Did they think that Finnick would stand a 
better chance of winning if he had Peeta and me as 
allies? The haggard look on Finnick's face tells me 
that now is not the moment to ask. 

Instead I try to put myself back together. I rescue my 
mockingj ay pin from my ruined jumpsuit and pin it to 
the strap of my undershirt. The flotation belt must be 
acid resistant, since it looks as good as new. I can 
284 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



swim, so the flotation belt's not really necessary, but 
Brutus blocked my arrow with his, so I buckle it back 
on, thinking it might offer some protection. I undo my 
hair and comb it with my fingers, thinning it out 
considerably since the fog droplets damaged it. Then I 
braid back what's left of it. 

Peeta has found a good tree about ten yards from the 
narrow strip of beach. We can hardly see him, but the 
sound of his knife against the wooden trunk is crystal 
clear. I wonder what happened to the awl. Mags 
must've either dropped it or taken it into the fog with 
her. Anyway, it's gone. 

I have moved out a bit farther into the shallows, 
floating alternately on my belly and back. If the 
seawater healed Peeta and me, it seems to be 
transforming Finnick altogether. He begins to move 
slowly, just testing his limbs, and gradually begins to 
swim. But it's not like me swimming, the rhythmic 
strokes, the even pace. It's like watching some 
strange sea animal coming back to life. He dives and 
surfaces, spraying water out of his mouth, rolls over 
and over in some bizarre corkscrew motion that 
makes me dizzy even to watch. And then, when he's 
been underwater so long I feel certain he's drowned, 
his head pops up right next to me and I start. 

"Don't do that," I say. 

"What? Come up or stay under?" he says. 

"Either. Neither. Whatever. Just soak in the water 
and behave," I say. "Or if you feel this good, let's go 
help Peeta." 

In just the short time it takes to cross to the edge of 
the jungle, I become aware of the change. Put it down 
to years of hunting, or maybe my reconstructed ear 
285 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



does work a little better than anyone intended. But I 
sense the mass of warm bodies poised above us. They 
don't need to chatter or scream. The mere breathing 
of so many is enough. 

I touch Finnick's arm and he follows my gaze upward. 
I don't know how they arrived so silently. Perhaps 
they didn't. We've all been absorbed in restoring our 
bodies. 

During that time they've assembled. Not five or ten 
but scores of monkeys weigh down the limbs of the 
jungle trees. The pair we spotted when we first 
escaped the fog felt like a welcoming committee. This 
crew feels ominous. 

I arm my bow with two arrows and Finnick adjusts 
the trident in his hand. "Peeta," I say as calmly as 
possible. "I need your help with something." 

"Okay, just a minute. I think I've just about got it," he 
says, still occupied with the tree. "Yes, there. Have 
you got the spile?" 

"I do. But we've found something you'd better take a 
look at," I continue in a measured voice. "Only move 
toward us quietly, so you don't startle it." For some 
reason, I don't want him to notice the monkeys, or 
even glance their way. There are creatures that 
interpret mere eye contact as aggression. 

Peeta turns to us, panting from his work on the tree. 
The tone of my request is so odd that it's alerted him 
to some irregularity. "Okay," he says casually. He 
begins to move through the jungle, and although I 
know he's trying hard to be quiet, this has never been 
his strong suit, even when he had two sound legs. 
But it's all right, he's moving, the monkeys are 
holding their positions. He's just five yards from the 
286 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



beach when he senses them. His eyes only dart up for 
a second, but it's as if he's triggered a bomb. The 
monkeys explode into a shrieking mass of orange fur 
and converge on him. 

I've never seen any animal move so fast. They slide 
down the vines as if the things were greased. Leap 
impossible distances from tree to tree. Fangs bared, 
hackles raised, claws shooting out like switchblades. I 
may be unfamiliar with monkeys, but animals in 
nature don't act like this. "Mutts!" I spit out as 
Finnick and I crash into the greenery. 

I know every arrow must count, and they do. In the 
eerie light, I bring down monkey after monkey, 
targeting eyes and hearts and throats, so that each 
hit means a death. But still it wouldn't be enough 
without Finnick spearing the beasts like fish and 
flinging them aside, Peeta slashing away with his 
knife. I feel claws on my leg, down my back, before 
someone takes out the attacker. The air grows heavy 
with trampled plants, the scent of blood, and the 
musty stink of the monkeys. Peeta and Finnick and I 
position ourselves in a triangle, a few yards apart, our 
backs to one another. My heart sinks as my fingers 
draw back my last arrow. Then I remember Peeta has 
a sheath, too. And he's not shooting, he's hacking 
away with that knife. My own knife is out now, but 
the monkeys are quicker, can spring in and out so 
fast you can barely react. 

"Peeta!" I shout. "Your arrows!" 

Peeta turns to see my predicament and is sliding off 
his sheath when it happens. A monkey lunges out of 
a tree for his chest. I have no arrow, no way to shoot. 
I can hear the thud of Finnick's trident finding 
another mark and know his weapon is occupied. 
Peeta's knife arm is disabled as he tries to remove the 



287 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



sheath. I throw my knife at the oncoming mutt but 
the creature somersaults, evading the blade, and 
stays on its trajectory. 

Weaponless, defenseless, I do the only thing I can 
think of. I run for Peeta, to knock him to the ground, 
to protect his body with mine, even though I know I 
won't make it in time. 

She does, though. Materializing, it seems, from thin 
air. One moment nowhere, the next reeling in front of 
Peeta. Already bloody, mouth open in a high-pitched 
scream, pupils enlarged so her eyes seem like black 
holes. 

The insane morphling from District 6 throws up her 
skeletal arms as if to embrace the monkey, and it 
sinks its fangs into her chest. 



288 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Peeta drops the sheath and buries his knife into the 
monkey's back, stabbing it again and again until it 
releases its jaw. He kicks the mutt away, bracing for 
more. I have his arrows now, a loaded bow, and 
Finnick at my back, breathing hard but not actively 
engaged. 

"Come on, then! Come on!" shouts Peeta, panting 
with rage. But something has happened to the 
monkeys. They are withdrawing, backing up trees, 
fading into the jungle, as if some unheard voice calls 
them away. A Gamemaker's voice, telling them this is 
enough. 

"Get her," I say to Peeta. "Well cover you." 

Peeta gently lifts up the morphling and carries her the 
last few yards to the beach while Finnick and I keep 
our weapons at the ready. But except for the orange 
carcasses on the ground, the monkeys are gone. Peeta 
lays the morphling on the sand. I cut away the 
material over her chest, revealing the four deep 
puncture wounds. Blood slowly trickles from them, 
making them look far less deadly than they are. The 
real damage is inside. By the position of the openings, 
I feel certain the beast ruptured something vital, a 
lung, maybe even her heart. 

She lies on the sand, gasping like a fish out of water. 
Sagging skin, sickly green, her ribs as prominent as a 
child's dead of starvation. Surely she could afford 
food, but turned to the morphling just as Haymitch 
turned to drink, I guess. Everything about her speaks 
of waste — her body, her life, the vacant look in her 
eyes. I hold one of her twitching hands, unclear 
289 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



whether it moves from the poison that affected our 
nerves, the shock of the attack, or withdrawal from 
the drug that was her sustenance. There is nothing 
we can do. Nothing but stay with her while she dies. 

"I'll watch the trees," Finnick says before walking 
away. I'd like to walk away, too, but she grips my 
hand so tightly I would have to pry off her fingers, 
and I don't have the strength for that kind of cruelty. I 
think of Rue, how maybe I could sing a song or 
something. But I don't even know the morphling's 
name, let alone if she likes songs. I just know she's 
dying. 

Peeta crouches down on the other side of her and 
strokes her hair. When he begins to speak in a soft 
voice, it seems almost nonsensical, but the words 
aren't for me. "With my paint box at home, I can 
make every color imaginable. Pink. As pale as a 
baby's skin. Or as deep as rhubarb. Green like spring 
grass. Blue that shimmers like ice on water." 

The morphling stares into Peeta's eyes, hanging on to 
his words. 

"One time, I spent three days mixing paint until I 
found the right shade for sunlight on white fur. You 
see, I kept thinking it was yellow, but it was much 
more than that. Layers of all sorts of color. One by 
one," says Peeta. 

The morphling's breathing is slowing into shallow 
catch-breaths. Her free hand dabbles in the blood on 
her chest, making the tiny swirling motions she so 
loved to paint with. 

"I haven't figured out a rainbow yet. They come so 
quickly and leave so soon. I never have enough time 
to capture them. Just a bit of blue here or purple 
290 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



there. And then they fade away again. Back into the 
air," says Peeta. 



The morphling seems mesmerized by Peeta's words. 
Entranced. She lifts up a trembling hand and paints 
what I think might be a flower on Peeta's cheek. 

"Thank you," he whispers. "That looks beautiful." 

For a moment, the morphling's face lights up in a grin 
and she makes a small squeaking sound. Then her 
blood-dappled hand falls back onto her chest, she 
gives one last huff of air, and the cannon fires. The 
grip on my hand releases. 

Peeta carries her out into the water. He returns and 
sits beside me. The morphling floats out toward the 
Cornucopia for a while, then the hovercraft appears 
and a four-pronged claw drops, encases her, carries 
her into the night sky, and she's gone. 

Finnick rejoins us, his fist full of my arrows still wet 
with monkey blood. He drops them beside me on the 
sand. "Thought you might want these." 

"Thanks," I say. I wade into the water and wash off 
the gore, from my weapons, my wounds. By the time I 
return to the jungle to gather some moss to dry them, 
all the monkeys' bodies have vanished. 

"Where did they go?" I ask. 

"We don't know exactly. The vines shifted and they 
were gone," says Finnick. 

We stare at the jungle, numb and exhausted. In the 
quiet, I notice that the spots where the fog droplets 
touched my skin have scabbed over. They've stopped 
hurting and begun to itch. Intensely. I try to think of 



291 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



this as a good sign. That they are healing. I glance 
over at Peeta, at Finnick, and see they're both 
scratching at their damaged faces. Yes, even Finnick's 
beauty has been marred by this night. 

"Don't scratch," I say, wanting badly to scratch 
myself. But I know it's the advice my mother would 
give. "You'll only bring infection. Think it's safe to try 
for the water again?" 

We make our way back to the tree Peeta was tapping. 
Finnick and I stand with our weapons poised while he 
works the spile in, but no threat appears. Peeta's 
found a good vein and the water begins to gush from 
the spile. We slake our thirst, let the warm water pour 
over our itching bodies. We fill a handful of shells 
with drinking water and go back to the beach. 

It's still night, though dawn can't be too many hours 
away. Unless the Gamemakers want it to be. "Why 
don't you two get some rest?" I say. "Ill watch for a 
while." 

"No, Katniss, I'd rather," says Finnick. I look in his 
eyes, at his face, and realize he's barely holding back 
tears. Mags. The least I can do is give him the privacy 
to mourn her. 

"All right, Finnick, thanks," I say. I lie down on the 
sand with Peeta, who drifts off at once. I stare into the 
night, thinking of what a difference a day makes. How 
yesterday morning, Finnick was on my kill list, and 
now I'm willing to sleep with him as my guard. He 
saved Peeta and let Mags die and I don't know why. 
Only that I can never settle the balance owed between 
us. All I can do at the moment is go to sleep and let 
him grieve in peace. And so I do. 



292 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



It's midmorning when I open my eyes again. Peeta's 
still out beside me. Above us, a mat of grass 
suspended on branches shields our faces from the 
sunlight. I sit up and see that Finnick's hands have 
not been idle. Two woven bowls are filled with fresh 
water. A third holds a mess of shellfish. 

Finnick sits on the sand, cracking them open with a 
stone. "They're better fresh," he says, ripping a chunk 
of flesh from a shell and popping it into his mouth. 
His eyes are still puffy but I pretend not to notice. 

My stomach begins to growl at the smell of food and I 
reach for one. The sight of my fingernails, caked with 
blood, stops me. I've been scratching my skin raw in 
my sleep. 

"You know, if you scratch you'll bring on infection," 
says Finnick. 

"That's what I've heard," I say. I go into the saltwater 
and wash off the blood, trying to decide which I hate 
more, pain or itching. Fed up, I stomp back onto the 
beach, turn my face upward, and snap, "Hey, 
Haymitch, if you're not too drunk, we could use a 
little something for our skin." 

It's almost funny how quickly the parachute appears 
above me. I reach up and the tube lands squarely in 
my open hand. "About time," I say, but I can't keep 
the scowl on my face. Haymitch. What I wouldn't give 
for five minutes of conversation with him. 

I plunk down on the sand next to Finnick and screw 
the lid off the tube. Inside is a thick, dark ointment 
with a pungent smell, a combination of tar and pine 
needles. I wrinkle my nose as I squeeze a glob of the 
medicine onto my palm and begin to massage it into 
my leg. A sound of pleasure slips out of my mouth as 
293 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



the stuff eradicates my itching. It also stains my 
scabby skin a ghastly gray-green. As I start on the 
second leg I toss the tube to Finnick, who eyes me 
doubtfully. 

"It's like you're decomposing," says Finnick. But I 
guess the itching wins out, because after a minute 
Finnick begins to treat his own skin, too. Really, the 
combination of the scabs and the ointment looks 
hideous. I can't help enjoying his distress. 

"Poor Finnick. Is this the first time in your life you 
haven't looked pretty?" I say. 

"It must be. The sensation's completely new. How 
have you managed it all these years?" he asks. 

"Just avoid mirrors. Youll forget about it," I say. 

"Not if I keep looking at you," he says. 

We slather ourselves down, even taking turns rubbing 
the ointment into each other's backs where the 
undershirts don't protect our skin. "I'm going to wake 
Peeta," I say. 

"No, wait," says Finnick. "Let's do it together. Put our 
faces right in front of his." 

Well, there's so little opportunity for fun left in my life, 
I agree. We position ourselves on either side of Peeta, 
lean over until our faces are inches from his nose, 
and give him a shake. "Peeta. Peeta, wake up," I say 
in a soft, singsong voice. 

His eyelids flutter open and then he jumps like we've 
stabbed him. "Aa!" 



294 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Finnick and I fall back in the sand, laughing our 
heads off. Every time we try to stop, we look at Peeta's 
attempt to maintain a disdainful expression and it 
sets us off again. By the time we pull ourselves 
together, I'm thinking that maybe Finnick Odair is all 
right. At least not as vain or self-important as I'd 
thought. Not so bad at all, really. And just as I've 
come to this conclusion, a parachute lands next to us 
with a fresh loaf of bread. Remembering from last 
year how Haymitch's gifts are often timed to send a 
message, I make a note to myself. Be friends with 
Finnick. You'll get food. 

Finnick turns the bread over in his hands, examining 
the crust. A bit too possessively. It's not necessary. 
It's got that green tint from seaweed that the bread 
from District 4 always has. We all know it's his. 
Maybe he's just realized how precious it is, and that 
he may never see another loaf again. Maybe some 
memory of Mags is associated with the crust. But all 
he says is, "This will go well with the shellfish." 

While I help Peeta coat his skin with the ointment, 
Finnick deftly cleans the meat from the shellfish. We 
gather round and eat the delicious sweet flesh with 
the salty bread from District 4. 

We all look monstrous — the ointment seems to be 
causing some of the scabs to peel — but I'm glad for 
the medicine. Not just because it gives relief from the 
itching, but also because it acts as protection from 
that blazing white sun in the pink sky. By its 
position, I estimate it must be going on ten o'clock, 
that we've been in the arena for about a day. Eleven 
of us are dead. Thirteen alive. Somewhere in the 
jungle, ten are concealed. Three or four are the 
Careers. I don't really feel like trying to remember who 
the others are. 



295 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



For me, the jungle has quickly evolved from a place of 
protection to a sinister trap. I know at some point 
well be forced to reenter its depths, either to hunt or 
be hunted, but for right now I'm planning to stick to 
our little beach. And I don't hear Peeta or Finnick 
suggesting we do otherwise. For a while the jungle 
seems almost static, humming, shimmering, but not 
flaunting its dangers. Then, in the distance, comes 
screaming. Across from us, a wedge of the jungle 
begins to vibrate. An enormous wave crests high on 
the hill, topping the trees and roaring down the slope. 
It hits the existing seawater with such force that, even 
though we're as far as we can get from it, the surf 
bubbles up around our knees, setting our few 
possessions afloat. Among the three of us, we manage 
to collect everything before it's carried off, except for 
our chemical-riddled jumpsuits, which are so eaten 
away no one cares if we lose them. 

A cannon fires. We see the hovercraft appear over the 
area where the wave began and pluck a body from the 
trees. Twelve, I think. 

The circle of water slowly calms down, having 
absorbed the giant wave. We rearrange our things 
back on the wet sand and are about to settle down 
when I see them. Three figures, about two spokes 
away, stumbling onto the beach. "There," I say 
quietly, nodding in the newcomers' direction. Peeta 
and Finnick follow my gaze. As if by previous 
agreement, we all fade back into the shadows of the 
jungle. 

The trio's in bad shape — you can see that right off. 
One is being practically dragged out by a second, and 
the third wanders in loopy circles, as if deranged. 
They're a solid brick-red color, as if they've been 
dipped in paint and left out to dry. 



296 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Who is that?" asks Peeta. "Or what? Muttations?" 



I draw back an arrow, readying for an attack. But all 
that happens is that the one who was being dragged 
collapses on the beach. The dragger stamps the 
ground in frustration and, in an apparent fit of 
temper, turns and shoves the circling, deranged one 
over. 

Finnick's face lights up. "Johanna!" he calls, and runs 
for the red things. 

"Finnick!" I hear Johanna's voice reply. 

I exchange a look with Peeta. "What now?" I ask. 

"We can't really leave Finnick," he says. 

"Guess not. Come on, then," I say grouchily, because 
even if I'd had a list of allies, Johanna Mason would 
definitely not have been on it. The two of us tromp 
down the beach to where Finnick and Johanna are 
just meeting up. As we move in closer, I see her 
companions, and confusion sets in. That's Beetee on 
the ground on his back and Wiress who's regained 
her feet to continue making loops. "She's got Wiress 
and Beetee." 

"Nuts and Volts?" says Peeta, equally puzzled. "I've 
got to hear how this happened." 

When we reach them, Johanna's gesturing toward the 
jungle and talking very fast to Finnick. "We thought it 
was rain, you know, because of the lightning, and we 
were all so thirsty. But when it started coming down, 
it turned out to be blood. Thick, hot blood. You 
couldn't see, you couldn't speak without getting a 
mouthful. We just staggered around, trying to get out 
of it. That's when Blight hit the force field." 



297 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"I'm sorry, Johanna," says Finnick. It takes a moment 
to place Blight. I think he was Johanna's male 
counterpart from District 7, but I hardly remember 
seeing him. Come to think of it, I don't even think he 
showed up for training. 

"Yeah, well, he wasn't much, but he was from home," 
she says. "And he left me alone with these two." She 
nudges Beetee, who's barely conscious, with her shoe. 
"He got a knife in the back at the Cornucopia. And 
her—" 

We all look over at Wiress, who's circling around, 
coated in dried blood, and murmuring, "Tick, tock. 
Tick, tock." 

"Yeah, we know. Tick, tock. Nuts is in shock," says 
Johanna. This seems to draw Wiress in her direction 
and she careens into Johanna, who harshly shoves 
her to the beach. "Just stay down, will you?" 

"Lay off her," I snap. 

Johanna narrows her brown eyes at me in hatred. 
"Lay off her?" she hisses. She steps forward before I 
can react and slaps me so hard I see stars. "Who do 
you think got them out of that bleeding jungle for 
you? You — " Finnick tosses her writhing body over his 
shoulder and carries her out into the water and 
repeatedly dunks her while she screams a lot of really 
insulting things at me. But I don't shoot. Because 
she's with Finnick and because of what she said, 
about getting them for me. 

"What did she mean? She got them for me?" I ask 
Peeta. 

"I don't know. You did want them originally," he 
reminds me. 



298 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Yeah, I did. Originally." But that answers nothing. I 
look down at Beetee's inert body. "But I won't have 
them long unless we do something." 

Peeta lifts Beetee up in his arms and I take Wiress by 
the hand and we go back to our little beach camp. I 
sit Wiress in the shallows so she can get washed up a 
bit, but she just clutches her hands together and 
occasionally mumbles, "Tick, tock." I unhook Beetee's 
belt and find a heavy metal cylinder attached to the 
side with a rope of vines. I can't tell what it is, but if 
he thought it was worth saving, I'm not going to be 
the one who loses it. I toss it up on the sand. Beetee's 
clothes are glued to him with blood, so Peeta holds 
him in the water while I loosen them. It takes some 
time to get the jumpsuit off, and then we find his 
undergarments are saturated with blood as well. 
There's no choice but to strip him naked to get him 
clean, but I have to say this doesn't make much of an 
impression on me anymore. Our kitchen table's been 
full of so many naked men this year. You kind of get 
used to it after a while. 

We put down Finnick's mat and lay Beetee on his 
stomach so we can examine his back. There's a gash 
about six inches long running from his shoulder 
blade to below his ribs. Fortunately it's not too deep. 
He's lost a lot of blood, though — you can tell by the 
pallor of his skin — and it's still oozing out of the 
wound. 

I sit back on my heels, trying to think. What do I have 
to work with? Seawater? I feel like my mother when 
her first line of defense for treating everything was 
snow. I look over at the jungle. I bet there's a whole 
pharmacy in there if I knew how to use it. But these 
aren't my plants. Then I think about the moss Mags 
gave me to blow my nose. "Be right back," I tell Peeta. 
Fortunately the stuff seems to be pretty common in 
299 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



the jungle. I rip an armful from the nearby trees and 
carry it back to the beach. I make a thick pad out of 
the moss, place it on Beetee's cut, and secure it by 
tying vines around his body. We get some water into 
him and then pull him into the shade at the edge of 
the jungle. 

"I think that's all we can do," I say. 

"It's good. You're good with this healing stuff," he 
says. "It's in your blood." 

"No," I say, shaking my head. "I got my father's 
blood." The kind that quickens during a hunt, not an 
epidemic. "I'm going to see about Wiress." 

I take a handful of the moss to use as a rag and join 
Wiress in the shallows. She doesn't resist as I work off 
her clothing, scrub the blood from her skin. But her 
eyes are dilated with fear, and when I speak, she 
doesn't respond except to say with ever-increasing 
urgency, "Tick, tock." She does seem to be trying to 
tell me something, but with no Beetee to explain her 
thoughts, I'm at a loss. 

"Yes, tick, tock. Tick, tock," I say. This seems to calm 
her down a little. I wash out her jumpsuit until 
there's hardly a trace of blood, and help her back into 
it. It's not damaged like ours were. Her belt's fine, so I 
fasten that on, too. Then I pin her undergarments, 
along with Beetee's, under some rocks and let them 
soak. 

By the time I've rinsed out Beetee's jumpsuit, a shiny 
clean Johanna and peeling Finnick have joined us. 
For a while, Johanna gulps water and stuffs herself 
with shellfish while I try to coax something into 
Wiress. Finnick tells about the fog and the monkeys 



300 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



in a detached, almost clinical voice, avoiding the most 
important detail of the story. 

Everybody offers to guard while the others rest, but in 
the end, it's Johanna and I who stay up. Me because 
I'm really rested, she because she simply refuses to lie 
down. The two of us sit in silence on the beach until 
the others have gone to sleep. 

Johanna glances over at Finnick, to be sure, then 
turns to me. "How'd you lose Mags?" 

"In the fog. Finnick had Peeta. I had Mags for a while. 
Then I couldn't lift her. Finnick said he couldn't take 
them both. She kissed him and walked right into the 
poison," I say. 

"She was Finnick's mentor, you know," Johanna says 
accusingly. 

"No, I didn't," I say. 

"She was half his family," she says a few moments 
later, but there's less venom behind it. 

We watch the water lap up over the undergarments. 
"So what were you doing with Nuts and Volts?" I ask. 

"I told you — I got them for you. Haymitch said if we 
were to be allies I had to bring them to you," says 
Johanna. "That's what you told him, right?" 

No, I think. But I nod my head in assent. "Thanks. I 
appreciate it." 

"I hope so." She gives me a look filled with loathing, 
like I'm the biggest drag possible on her life. I wonder 
if this is what it's like to have an older sister who 
really hates you. 



301 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Tick, tock," I hear behind me. I turn and see Wiress 
has crawled over. Her eyes are focused on the jungle. 

"Oh, goody, she's back. Okay, I'm going to sleep. You 
and Nuts can guard together," Johanna says. She 
goes over and flings herself down beside Finnick. 

"Tick, tock," whispers Wiress. I guide her in front of 
me and get her to lie down, stroking her arm to 
soothe her. She drifts off, stirring restlessly, 
occasionally sighing out her phrase. "Tick, tock." 

"Tick, tock," I agree softly. "It's time for bed. Tick, 
tock. Go to sleep." 

The sun rises in the sky until it's directly over us. It 
must be noon, I think absently. Not that it matters. 
Across the water, off to the right, I see the enormous 
flash as the lightning bolt hits the tree and the 
electrical storm begins again. Right in the same area 
it did last night. Someone must have moved into its 
range, triggered the attack. I sit for a while watching 
the lightning, keeping Wiress calm, lulled into a sort 
of peacefulness by the lapping of the water. I think of 
last night, how the lightning began just after the bell 
tolled. Twelve bongs. 

"Tick, tock," Wiress says, surfacing to consciousness 
for a moment and then going back under. 

Twelve bongs last night. Like it was midnight. Then 
lightning. The sun overhead now. Like it's noon. And 
lightning. 

Slowly I rise up and survey the arena. The lightning 
there. In the next pie wedge over came the blood rain, 
where Johanna, Wiress, and Beetee were caught. We 
would have been in the third section, right next to 
that, when the fog appeared. And as soon as it was 



302 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



sucked away, the monkeys began to gather in the 
fourth. Tick, tock. My head snaps to the other side. A 
couple of hours ago, at around ten, that wave came 
out of the second section to the left of where the 
lightning strikes now. At noon. At midnight. At noon. 

"Tick, tock," Wiress says in her sleep. As the lightning 
ceases and the blood rain begins just to the right of it, 
her words suddenly make sense. 

"Oh," I say under my breath. "Tick, tock." My eyes 
sweep around the full circle of the arena and I know 
she's right. "Tick, tock. This is a clock." 



303 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



A clock. I can almost see the hands ticking around 
the twelve-sectioned face of the arena. Each hour 
begins a new horror, a new Gamemaker weapon, and 
ends the previous. Lightning, blood rain, fog, 
monkeys — those are the first four hours on the clock. 
And at ten, the wave. I don't know what happens in 
the other seven, but I know Wiress is right. 

At present, the blood rain's falling and we're on the 
beach below the monkey segment, far too close to the 
fog for my liking. Do the various attacks stay within 
the confines of the jungle? Not necessarily. The wave 
didn't. If that fog leaches out of the jungle, or the 
monkeys return... 

"Get up," I order, shaking Peeta and Finnick and 
Johanna awake. "Get up — we have to move." There's 
enough time, though, to explain the clock theory to 
them. About Wiress 's tick-tocking and how the 
movements of the invisible hands trigger a deadly 
force in each section. 

I think I've convinced everyone who's conscious 
except Johanna, who's naturally opposed to liking 
anything I suggest. But even she agrees it's better to 
be safe than sorry. 

While the others collect our few possessions and get 
Beetee back into his jumpsuit, I rouse Wiress. She 
awakes with a panicked "tick, tock!" 

"Yes, tick, tock, the arena's a clock. It's a clock, 
Wiress, you were right," I say. "You were right." 



304 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Relief floods her face — I guess because somebody has 
finally understood what she's known probably from 
the first tolling of the bells. "Midnight." 

"It starts at midnight," I confirm. 

A memory struggles to surface in my brain. I see a 
clock. No, it's a watch, resting in Plutarch 
Heavensbee's palm. "It starts at midnight," Plutarch 
said. And then my mockingjay lit up briefly and 
vanished. In retrospect, it's like he was giving me a 
clue about the arena. But why would he? At the time, 
I was no more a tribute in these Games than he was. 
Maybe he thought it would help me as a mentor. Or 
maybe this had been the plan all along. 

Wiress nods at the blood rain. "One-thirty," she says. 

"Exactly. One-thirty. And at two, a terrible poisonous 
fog begins there," I say, pointing at the nearby jungle. 
"So we have to move somewhere safe now." She 
smiles and stands up obediently. "Are you thirsty?" I 
hand her the woven bowl and she gulps down about a 
quart. Finnick gives her the last bit of bread and she 
gnaws on it. With the inability to communicate 
overcome, she's functioning again. 

I check my weapons. Tie up the spile and the tube of 
medicine in the parachute and fix it to my belt with 
vine. 

Beetee's still pretty out of it, but when Peeta tries to 
lift him, he objects. "Wire," he says. 

"She's right here," Peeta tells him. "Wiress is fine. 
She's coming, too." 

But still Beetee struggles. "Wire," he insists. 



305 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Oh, I know what he wants," says Johanna 
impatiently. She crosses the beach and picks up the 
cylinder we took from his belt when we were bathing 
him. It's coated in a thick layer of congealed blood. 
"This worthless thing. It's some kind of wire or 
something. That's how he got cut. Running up to the 
Cornucopia to get this. I don't know what kind of 
weapon it's supposed to be. I guess you could pull off 
a piece and use it as a garrote or something. But 
really, can you imagine Beetee garroting somebody?" 

"He won his Games with wire. Setting up that 
electrical trap," says Peeta. "It's the best weapon he 
could have." 

There's something odd about Johanna not putting 
this together. Something that doesn't quite ring true. 
Suspicious. "Seems like you'd have figured that out," I 
say. "Since you nicknamed him Volts and all." 

Johanna's eyes narrow at me dangerously. "Yeah, 
that was really stupid of me, wasn't it?" she says. "I 
guess I must have been distracted by keeping your 
little friends alive. While you were... what, again? 
Getting Mags killed off?" 

My fingers tighten on the knife handle at my belt. 

"Go ahead. Try it. I don't care if you are knocked up, 
I'll rip your throat out," says Johanna. 

I know I can't kill her right now. But it's just a matter 
of time with Johanna and me. Before one of us offs 
the other. 

"Maybe we all had better be careful where we step," 
says Finnick, shooting me a look. He takes the coil 
and sets it on Beetee's chest. "There's your wire, 
Volts. Watch where you plug it." 



306 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Peeta picks up the now-unresisting Beetee. "Where 
to?" 



"I'd like to go to the Cornucopia and watch. Just to 
make sure we're right about the clock," says Finnick. 
It seems as good a plan as any. Besides, I wouldn't 
mind the chance of going over the weapons again. 
And there are six of us now. Even if you count Beetee 
and Wiress out, we've got four good fighters. It's so 
different from where I was last year at this point, 
doing everything on my own. Yes, it's great to have 
allies as long as you can ignore the thought that you 11 
have to kill them. 

Beetee and Wiress will probably find some way to die 
on their own. If we have to run from something, how 
far would they get? Johanna, frankly, I could easily 
kill if it came down to protecting Peeta. Or maybe 
even just to shut her up. What I really need is for 
someone to take out Finnick for me, since I don't 
think I can do it personally. Not after all he's done for 
Peeta. I think about maneuvering him into some kind 
of encounter with the Careers. It's cold, I know. But 
what are my options? Now that we know about the 
clock, he probably won't die in the jungle, so 
someone's going to have to kill him in battle. 

Because this is so repellent to think about, my mind 
frantically tries to change topics. But the only thing 
that distracts me from my current situation is 
fantasizing about killing President Snow. Not very 
pretty daydreams for a seventeen-year-old girl, I 
guess, but very satisfying. 

We walk down the nearest sand strip, approaching 
the Cornucopia with care, just in case the Careers are 
concealed there. I doubt they are, because we've been 
on the beach for hours and there's been no sign of 
life. The area's abandoned, as I expected. Only the big 



307 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



golden horn and the picked-over pile of weapons 
remain. 

When Peeta lays Beetee in the bit of shade the 
Cornucopia provides, he calls out to Wiress. She 
crouches beside him and he puts the coil of wire in 
her hands. "Clean it, will you?" he asks. 

Wiress nods and scampers over to the water's edge, 
where she dunks the coil in the water. She starts 
quietly singing some funny little song, about a mouse 
running up a clock. It must be for children, but it 
seems to make her happy. 

"Oh, not the song again," says Johanna, rolling her 
eyes. "That went on for hours before she started tick- 
tocking." 

Suddenly Wiress stands up very straight and points 
to the jungle. "Two," she says. 

I follow her finger to where the wall of fog has just 
begun to seep out onto the beach. "Yes, look, Wiress 
is right. It's two o'clock and the fog has started." 

"Like clockwork," says Peeta. "You were very smart to 
figure that out, Wiress." 

Wiress smiles and goes back to singing and dunking 
her coil. "Oh, she's more than smart," says Beetee. 
"She's intuitive." We all turn to look at Beetee, who 
seems to be coming back to life. "She can sense 
things before anyone else. Like a canary in one of 
your coal mines." 

"What's that?" Finnick asks me. 

"It's a bird that we take down into the mines to warn 
us if there's bad air," I say. 



308 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"What's it do, die?" asks Johanna. 

"It stops singing first. That's when you should get out. 
But if the air's too bad, it dies, yes. And so do you." I 
don't want to talk about dying songbirds. They bring 
up thoughts of my father's death and Rue's death and 
Maysilee Donner's death and my mother inheriting 
her songbird. Oh, great, and now I'm thinking of Gale, 
deep down in that horrible mine, with President 
Snow's threat hanging over his head. So easy to make 
it look like an accident down there. A silent canary, a 
spark, and nothing more. 

I go back to imagining killing the president. 

Despite her annoyance at Wiress, Johanna's as happy 
as I've seen her in the arena. While I'm adding to my 
stock of arrows, she pokes around until she comes up 
with a pair of lethal-looking axes. It seems an odd 
choice until I see her throw one with such force it 
sticks in the sun-softened gold of the Cornucopia. Of 
course. Johanna Mason. District 7. Lumber. I bet 
she's been tossing around axes since she could 
toddle. It's like Finnick with his trident. Or Beetee 
with his wire. Rue with her knowledge of plants. I 
realize it's just another disadvantage the District 12 
tributes have faced over the years. We don't go down 
in the mines until we're eighteen. It looks like most of 
the other tributes learn something about their trades 
early on. There are things you do in a mine that could 
come in handy in the Games. Wielding a pick. 
Blowing things up. Give you an edge. The way my 
hunting did. But we learn them too late. 

While I've been messing with the weapons, Peeta's 
been squatting on the ground, drawing something 
with the tip of his knife on a large, smooth leaf he 
brought from the jungle. 



309 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I look over his shoulder and see he's creating a map 
of the arena. In the center is the Cornucopia on its 
circle of sand with the twelve strips branching out 
from it. It looks like a pie sliced into twelve equal 
wedges. There's another circle representing the 
waterline and a slightly larger one indicating the edge 
of the jungle. "Look how the Cornucopia's positioned," 
he says to me. 

I examine the Cornucopia and see what he means. 
"The tail points toward twelve o'clock," I say. 

"Right, so this is the top of our clock," he says, and 
quickly scratches the numbers one through twelve 
around the clock face. "Twelve to one is the lightning 
zone." He writes lightning in tiny print in the 
corresponding wedge, then works clockwise adding 
blood, fog, and monkeys in the following sections. 

"And ten to eleven is the wave," I say. He adds it. 
Finnick and Johanna join us at this point, armed to 
the teeth with tridents, axes, and knives. 

"Did you notice anything unusual in the others?" I 
ask Johanna and Beetee, since they might have seen 
something we didn't. But all they've seen is a lot of 
blood. "I guess they could hold anything." 

"I'm going to mark the ones where we know the 
Gamemakers' weapon follows us out past the jungle, 
so we'll stay clear of those," says Peeta, drawing 
diagonal lines on the fog and wave beaches. Then he 
sits back. "Well, it's a lot more than we knew this 
morning, anyway." 

We all nod in agreement, and that's when I notice it. 
The silence. Our canary has stopped singing. 



310 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I don't wait. I load an arrow as I twist and get a 
glimpse of a dripping-wet Gloss letting Wiress slide to 
the ground, her throat slit open in a bright red smile. 
The point of my arrow disappears into his right 
temple, and in the instant it takes to reload, Johanna 
has buried an ax blade in Cashmere's chest. Finnick 
knocks away a spear Brutus throws at Peeta and 
takes Enobaria's knife in his thigh. If there wasn't a 
Cornucopia to duck behind, they'd be dead, both of 
the tributes from District 2. I spring forward in 
pursuit. Boom! Boom! Boom! The cannon confirms 
there's no way to help Wiress, no need to finish off 
Gloss or Cashmere. My allies and I are rounding the 
horn, starting to give chase to Brutus and Enobaria, 
who are sprinting down a sand strip toward the 
jungle. 

Suddenly the ground jerks beneath my feet and I'm 
flung on my side in the sand. The circle of land that 
holds the Cornucopia starts spinning fast, really fast, 
and I can see the jungle going by in a blur. I feel the 
centrifugal force pulling me toward the water and dig 
my hands and feet into the sand, trying to get some 
purchase on the unstable ground. Between the flying 
sand and the dizziness, I have to squeeze my eyes 
shut. There is literally nothing I can do but hold on 
until, with no deceleration, we slam to a stop. 

Coughing and queasy, I sit up slowly to find my 
companions in the same condition. Finnick, Johanna, 
and Peeta have hung on. The three dead bodies have 
been tossed out into the seawater. 

The whole thing, from missing Wiress 's song to now, 
can't have taken more than a minute or two. We sit 
there panting, scraping the sand out of our mouths. 

"Where's Volts?" says Johanna. We're on our feet. 
One wobbly circle of the Cornucopia confirms he's 
311 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



gone. Finnick spots him about twenty yards out in 
the water, barely keeping afloat, and swims out to 
haul him in. 

That's when I remember the wire and how important 
it was to him. I look frantically around. Where is it? 
Where is it? And then I see it, still clutched in 
Wiress's hands, far out in the water. My stomach 
contracts at the thought of what I must do next. 
"Cover me," I say to the others. I toss aside my 
weapons and race down the strip closest to her body. 
Without slowing down, I dive into the water and start 
for her. Out of the corner of my eye, I can see the 
hovercraft appearing over us, the claw starting to 
descend to take her away. But I don't stop. I just keep 
swimming as hard as I can and end up slamming into 
her body. I come up gasping, trying to avoid 
swallowing the bloodstained water that spreads out 
from the open wound in her neck. She's floating on 
her back, borne up by her belt and death, staring into 
that relentless sun. As I tread water, I have to wrench 
the coil of wire from her fingers, because her final grip 
on it is so tight. There's nothing I can do then but 
close her eyelids, whisper good-bye, and swim away. 
By the time I swing the coil up onto the sand and pull 
myself from the water, her body's gone. But I can still 
taste her blood mingled with the sea salt. 

I walk back to the Cornucopia. Finnick's gotten 
Beetee back alive, although a little waterlogged, 
sitting up and snorting out water. He had the good 
sense to hang on to his glasses, so at least he can 
see. I place the reel of wire on his lap. It's sparkling 
clean, no blood left at all. He unravels a piece of the 
wire and runs it through his fingers. For the first time 
I see it, and it's unlike any wire I know. A pale golden 
color and as fine as a piece of hair. I wonder how long 
it is. There must be miles of the stuff to fill the large 



312 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



spool. But I don't ask, because I know he's thinking of 
Wiress. 

I look at the others' sober faces. Now Finnick, 
Johanna, and Beetee have all lost their district 
partners. I cross to Peeta and wrap my arms around 
him, and for a while we all stay silent. 

"Let's get off this stinking island," Johanna says 
finally. There's only the matter of our weapons now, 
which we've largely retained. Fortunately the vines 
here are strong and the spile and tube of medicine 
wrapped in the parachute are still secured to my belt. 
Finnick strips off his undershirt and ties it around 
the wound Enobaria's knife made in his thigh; it's not 
deep. Beetee thinks he can walk now, if we go slowly, 
so I help him up. We decide to head to the beach at 
twelve o'clock. That should provide hours of calm and 
keep us clear of any poisonous residue. And then 
Peeta, Johanna, and Finnick head off in three 
different directions. 

"Twelve o'clock, right?" says Peeta. "The tail points at 
twelve." 

"Before they spun us," says Finnick. "I was judging by 
the sun." 

"The sun only tells you it's going on four, Finnick," I 
say. 

"I think Katniss's point is, knowing the time doesn't 
mean you necessarily know where four is on the 
clock. You might have a general idea of the direction. 
Unless you consider that they may have shifted the 
outer ring of jungle as well," says Beetee. 

No, Katniss's point was a lot more basic than that. 
Beetee 's articulated a theory far beyond my comment 



313 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



on the sun. But I just nod my head like I've been on 
the same page all along. "Yes, so any one of these 
paths could lead to twelve o'clock," I say. 

We circle around the Cornucopia, scrutinizing the 
jungle. It has a baffling uniformity. I remember the 
tall tree that took the first lightning strike at twelve 
o'clock, but every sector has a similar tree. Johanna 
thinks to follow Enobaria's and Brutus's tracks, but 
they have been blown or washed away. There's no 
way to tell where anything is. "I should have never 
mentioned the clock," I say bitterly. "Now they've 
taken that advantage away as well." 

"Only temporarily," says Beetee. "At ten, well see the 
wave again and be back on track." 

"Yes, they can't redesign the whole arena," says Peeta. 

"It doesn't matter," says Johanna impatiently. "You 
had to tell us or we never would have moved our 
camp in the first place, brainless." Ironically, her 
logical, if demeaning, reply is the only one that 
comforts me. Yes, I had to tell them to get them to 
move. "Come on, I need water. Anyone have a good 
gut feeling?" 

We randomly choose a path and take it, having no 
idea what number we're headed for. When we reach 
the jungle, we peer into it, trying to decipher what 
may be waiting inside. 

"Well, it must be monkey hour. And I don't see any of 
them in there," says Peeta. "I'm going to try to tap a 
tree." 

"No, it's my turn," says Finnick. 

"Ill at least watch your back," Peeta says. 



314 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Katniss can do that," says Johanna. "We need you to 
make another map. The other washed away." She 
yanks a large leaf off a tree and hands it to him. 

For a moment, I'm suspicious they're trying to divide 
and kill us. But it doesn't make sense. I'll have the 
advantage on Finnick if he's dealing with the tree and 
Peeta's much bigger than Johanna. So I follow 
Finnick about fifteen yards into the jungle, where he 
finds a good tree and starts stabbing to make a hole 
with his knife. 

As I stand there, weapons ready, I can't lose the 
uneasy feeling that something is going on and that it 
has to do with Peeta. I retrace our steps, starting from 
the moment the gong rang out, searching for the 
source of my discomfort. Finnick towing Peeta in off 
his metal plate. Finnick reviving Peeta after the force 
field stopped his heart. Mags running into the fog so 
that Finnick could carry Peeta. The morphling hurling 
herself in front of him to block the monkey's attack. 
The fight with the Careers was so quick, but didn't 
Finnick block Brutus 's spear from hitting Peeta even 
though it meant taking Enobaria's knife in his leg? 
And even now Johanna has him drawing a map on a 
leaf rather than risking the jungle... 

There is no question about it. For reasons completely 
unfathomable to me, some of the other victors are 
trying to keep him alive, even if it means sacrificing 
themselves. 

I'm dumbfounded. For one thing, that's my job. For 
another, it doesn't make sense. Only one of us can get 
out. So why have they chosen Peeta to protect? What 
has Haymitch possibly said to them, what has he 
bargained with to make them put Peeta's life above 
their own? 



315 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I know my own reasons for keeping Peeta alive. He's 
my friend, and this is my way to defy the Capitol, to 
subvert its terrible Games. But if I had no real ties to 
him, what would make me want to save him, to 
choose him over myself? Certainly he is brave, but we 
have all been brave enough to survive a Games. There 
is that quality of goodness that's hard to overlook, but 
still... and then I think of it, what Peeta can do so 
much better than the rest of us. He can use words. 
He obliterated the rest of the field at both interviews. 
And maybe it's because of that underlying goodness 
that he can move a crowd — no, a country — to his side 
with the turn of a simple sentence. 

I remember thinking that was the gift the leader of 
our revolution should have. Has Haymitch convinced 
the others of this? That Peeta's tongue would have far 
greater power against the Capitol than any physical 
strength the rest of us could claim? I don't know. It 
still seems like a really long leap for some of the 
tributes. I mean, we're talking about Johanna Mason 
here. But what other explanation can there be for 
their decided efforts to keep him alive? 

"Katniss, got that spile?" Finnick asks, snapping me 
back to reality. I cut the vine that ties the spile to my 
belt and hold the metal tube out to him. 

That's when I hear the scream. So full of fear and 
pain it ices my blood. And so familiar. I drop the spile, 
forget where I am or what lies ahead, only know I 
must reach her, protect her. I run wildly in the 
direction of the voice, heedless of danger, ripping 
through vines and branches, through anything that 
keeps me from reaching her. 

From reaching my little sister. 



316 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Where is she? What are they doing to her? "Prim!" I cry 
out. "Prim!" Only another agonized scream answers 
me. How did she get here? Why is she part of the 
Games? "Prim!" 

Vines cut into my face and arms, creepers grab my 
feet. But I am getting closer to her. Closer. Very close 
now. Sweat pours down my face, stinging the healing 
acid wounds. I pant, trying to get some use out of the 
warm, moist air that seems empty of oxygen. Prim 
makes a sound — such a lost, irretrievable sound — 
that I can't even imagine what they have done to 
evoke it. 

"Prim!" I rip through a wall of green into a small 
clearing and the sound repeats directly above me. 
Above me? My head whips back. Do they have her up 
in the trees? I desperately search the branches but 
see nothing. "Prim?" I say pleadingly. I hear her but 
can't see her. Her next wail rings out, clear as a bell, 
and there's no mistaking the source. It's coming from 
the mouth of a small, crested black bird perched on a 
branch about ten feet over my head. And then I 
understand. 

It's a jabberjay. 

I've never seen one before — I thought they no longer 
existed — and for a moment, as I lean against the 
trunk of the tree, clutching the stitch in my side, I 
examine it. The muttation, the forerunner, the father. 
I pull up a mental image of a mockingbird, fuse it 
with the jabberjay, and yes, I can see how they mated 
to make my mockingjay. There is nothing about the 
bird that suggests it's a mutt. Nothing except the 
317 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



horribly lifelike sounds of Prim's voice streaming from 
its mouth. I silence it with an arrow in its throat. The 
bird falls to the ground. I remove my arrow and wring 
its neck for good measure. Then I hurl the revolting 
thing into the jungle. No degree of hunger would ever 
tempt me to eat it. 

It wasn't real, I tell myself. The same way the 
muttation wolves last year weren't really the dead 
tributes. It's just a sadistic trick of the Gamemakers. 

Finnick crashes into the clearing to find me wiping 
my arrow clean with some moss. "Katniss?" 

"It's okay. I'm okay," I say, although I don't feel okay 
at all. "I thought I heard my sister but — " The piercing 
shriek cuts me off. It's another voice, not Prim's, 
maybe a young woman's. I don't recognize it. But the 
effect on Finnick is instantaneous. The color vanishes 
from his face and I can actually see his pupils dilate 
in fear. "Finnick, wait!" I say, reaching out to reassure 
him, but he's bolted away. Gone off in pursuit of the 
victim, as mindlessly as I pursued Prim. "Finnick!" I 
call, but I know he won't turn back and wait for me to 
give a rational explanation. So all I can do is follow 
him. 

It's no effort to track him, even though he's moving so 
fast, since he leaves a clear, trampled path in his 
wake. But the bird is at least a quarter mile away, 
most of it uphill, and by the time I reach him, I'm 
winded. He's circling around a giant tree. The trunk 
must be four feet in diameter and the limbs don't 
even begin until twenty feet up. The woman's shrieks 
emanate from somewhere in the foliage, but the 
jabberjay's concealed. Finnick's screaming as well, 
over and over. "Annie! Annie!" He's in a state of panic 
and completely unreachable, so I do what I would do 
anyway. I scale an adjacent tree, locate the jabberjay, 
318 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



and take it out with an arrow. It falls straight down, 
landing right at Finnick's feet. He picks it up, slowly 
making the connection, but when I slide down to join 
him, he looks more despairing than ever. 

"It's all right, Finnick. It's just a jabberjay. They're 
playing a trick on us," I say. "It's not real. It's not 
your... Annie." 

"No, it's not Annie. But the voice was hers. Jabberjays 
mimic what they hear. Where did they get those 
screams, Katniss?" he says. 

I can feel my own cheeks grow pale as I understand 
his meaning. "Oh, Finnick, you don't think they..." 

"Yes. I do. That's exactly what I think," he says. 

I have an image of Prim in a white room, strapped to 
a table, while masked, robed figures elicit those 
sounds from her. Somewhere they are torturing her, 
or did torture her, to get those sounds. My knees turn 
to water and I sink to the ground. Finnick is trying to 
tell me something, but I can't hear him. What I do 
finally hear is another bird starting up somewhere off 
to my left. And this time, the voice is Gale's. 

Finnick catches my arm before I can run. "No. It's not 
him." He starts pulling me downhill, toward the 
beach. "We're getting out of here!" But Gale's voice is 
so full of pain I can't help struggling to reach it. "It's 
not him, Katniss! It's a mutt!" Finnick shouts at me. 
"Come on!" He moves me along, half dragging, half 
carrying me, until I can process what he said. He's 
right, it's just another jabberjay. I can't help Gale by 
chasing it down. But that doesn't change the fact that 
it is Gale's voice, and somewhere, sometime, someone 
has made him sound like this. 



319 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I stop fighting Finnick, though, and like the night in 
the fog, I flee what I can't fight. What can only do me 
harm. Only this time it's my heart and not my body 
that's disintegrating. This must be another weapon of 
the clock. Four o'clock, I guess. When the hands tick- 
tock onto the four, the monkeys go home and the 
jabberjays come out to play. Finnick is right — getting 
out of here is the only thing to do. Although there will 
be nothing Haymitch can send in a parachute that 
will help either Finnick or me recover from the 
wounds the birds have inflicted. 

I catch sight of Peeta and Johanna standing at the 
tree line and I'm filled with a mixture of relief and 
anger. Why didn't Peeta come to help me? Why did no 
one come after us? Even now he hangs back, his 
hands raised, palms toward us, lips moving but no 
words reaching us. Why? 

The wall is so transparent, Finnick and I run smack 
into it and bounce back onto the jungle floor. I'm 
lucky. My shoulder took the worst of the impact, 
whereas Finnick hit face-first and now his nose is 
gushing blood. This is why Peeta and Johanna and 
even Beetee, who I see sadly shaking his head behind 
them, have not come to our aid. An invisible barrier 
blocks the area in front of us. It's not a force field. 
You can touch the hard, smooth surface all you like. 
But Peeta's knife and Johanna's ax can't make a dent 
in it. I know, without checking more than a few feet to 
one side, that it encloses the entire four-to-five-o'clock 
wedge. That we will be trapped like rats until the hour 
passes. 

Peeta presses his hand against the surface and I put 
my own up to meet it, as if I can feel him through the 
wall. I see his lips moving but I can't hear him, can't 
hear anything outside our wedge. I try to make out 



320 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



what he's saying, but I can't focus, so I just stare at 
his face, doing my best to hang on to my sanity. 

Then the birds begin to arrive. One by one. Perching 
in the surrounding branches. And a carefully 
orchestrated chorus of horror begins to spill out of 
their mouths. Finnick gives up at once, hunching on 
the ground, clenching his hands over his ears as if 
he's trying to crush his skull. I try to fight for a while. 
Emptying my quiver of arrows into the hated birds. 
But every time one drops dead, another quickly takes 
its place. And finally I give up and curl up beside 
Finnick, trying to block out the excruciating sounds 
of Prim, Gale, my mother, Madge, Rory, Vick, even 
Posy, helpless little Posy... 

I know it's stopped when I feel Peeta's hands on me, 
feel myself lifted from the ground and out of the 
jungle. But I stay eyes squeezed shut, hands over my 
ears, muscles too rigid to release. Peeta holds me on 
his lap, speaking soothing words, rocking me gently. 
It takes a long time before I begin to relax the iron 
grip on my body. And when I do, the trembling 
begins. 

"It's all right, Katniss," he whispers. 

"You didn't hear them," I answer. 

"I heard Prim. Right in the beginning. But it wasn't 
her," he says. "It was a jabberjay." 

"It was her. Somewhere. The jabberjay just recorded 
it," I say. 

"No, that's what they want you to think. The same 
way I wondered if Glimmer's eyes were in that mutt 
last year. But those weren't Glimmer's eyes. And that 
wasn't Prim's voice. Or if it was, they took it from an 



321 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



interview or something and distorted the sound. Made 
it say whatever she was saying," he says. 

"No, they were torturing her," I answer. "She's 
probably dead." 

"Katniss, Prim isn't dead. How could they kill Prim? 
We're almost down to the final eight of us. And what 
happens then?" Peeta says. 

"Seven more of us die," I say hopelessly. 

"No, back home. What happens when they reach the 
final eight tributes in the Games?" He lifts my chin so 
I have to look at him. Forces me to make eye contact. 
"What happens? At the final eight?" 

I know he's trying to help me, so I make myself think. 
"At the final eight?" I repeat. "They interview your 
family and friends back home." 

"That's right," says Peeta. "They interview your family 
and friends. And can they do that if they've killed 
them all?" 

"No?" I ask, still unsure. 

"No. That's how we know Prim's alive. Shell be the 
first one they interview, won't she?" he asks. 

I want to believe him. Badly. It's just... those voices... 

"First Prim. Then your mother. Your cousin, Gale. 
Madge," he continues. "It was a trick, Katniss. A 
horrible one. But we're the only ones who can be hurt 
by it. We're the ones in the Games. Not them." 

"You really believe that?" I say. 



322 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"I really do," says Peeta. I waver, thinking of how 
Peeta can make anyone believe anything. I look over 
at Finnick for confirmation, see he's fixated on Peeta, 
his words. 

"Do you believe it, Finnick?" I ask. 

"It could be true. I don't know," he says. "Could they 
do that, Beetee? Take someone's regular voice and 
make it..." 

"Oh, yes. It's not even that difficult, Finnick. Our 
children learn a similar technique in school," says 
Beetee. 

"Of course Peeta's right. The whole country adores 
Katniss's little sister. If they really killed her like this, 
they'd probably have an uprising on their hands," 
says Johanna flatly. "Don't want that, do they?" She 
throws back her head and shouts, "Whole country in 
rebellion? Wouldn't want anything like that!" 

My mouth drops open in shock. No one, ever, says 
anything like this in the Games. Absolutely, they've 
cut away from Johanna, are editing her out. But I 
have heard her and can never think about her again 
in the same way. Shell never win any awards for 
kindness, but she certainly is gutsy. Or crazy. She 
picks up some shells and heads toward the jungle. 
"I'm getting water," she says. 

I can't help catching her hand as she passes me. 
"Don't go in there. The birds — " I remember the birds 
must be gone, but I still don't want anyone in there. 
Not even her. 

"They can't hurt me. I'm not like the rest of you. 
There's no one left I love," Johanna says, and frees 
her hand with an impatient shake. When she brings 
323 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



me back a shell of water, I take it with a silent nod of 
thanks, knowing how much she would despise the 
pity in my voice. 

While Johanna collects water and my arrows, Beetee 
fiddles with his wire, and Finnick takes to the water. I 
need to clean up, too, but I stay in Peeta's arms, still 
too shaken to move. 

"Who did they use against Finnick?" he asks. 
"Somebody named Annie," I say. 
"Must be Annie Cresta," he says. 
"Who?" I ask. 

"Annie Cresta. She was the girl Mags volunteered for. 
She won about five years ago," says Peeta. 

That would have been the summer after my father 
died, when I first began feeding my family, when my 
whole being was occupied with battling starvation. "I 
don't remember those Games much," I say. "Was that 
the earthquake year?" 

"Yeah. Annie's the one who went mad when her 
district partner got beheaded. Ran off by herself and 
hid. But an earthquake broke a dam and most of the 
arena got flooded. She won because she was the best 
swimmer," says Peeta. 

"Did she get better after?" I ask. "I mean, her mind?" 

"I don't know. I don't remember ever seeing her at the 
Games again. But she didn't look too stable during 
the reaping this year," says Peeta. 



324 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



So that's who Finnick loves, I think. Not his string of 
fancy lovers in the Capitol. But a poor, mad girl back 
home. 

A cannon blast brings us all together on the beach. A 
hovercraft appears in what we estimate to be the six- 
to-seven-o'clock zone. We watch as the claw dips 
down five different times to retrieve the pieces of one 
body, torn apart. It's impossible to tell who it was. 
Whatever happens at six o'clock, I never want to 
know. 

Peeta draws a new map on a leaf, adding a JJ for 
jabberjays in the four-to-five-o'clock section and 
simply writing beast in the one where we saw the 
tribute collected in pieces. We now have a good idea of 
what seven of the hours will bring. And if there's any 
positive to the jabberjay attack, it's that it let us know 
where we are on the clock face again. 

Finnick weaves yet another water basket and a net for 
fishing. I take a quick swim and put more ointment 
on my skin. Then I sit at the edge of the water, 
cleaning the fish Finnick catches and watching the 
sun drop below the horizon. The bright moon is 
already on the rise, filling the arena with that strange 
twilight. We're about to settle down to our meal of raw 
fish when the anthem begins. And then the faces... 

Cashmere. Gloss. Wiress. Mags. The woman from 
District 5. The morphling who gave her life for Peeta. 
Blight. The man from 10. 

Eight dead. Plus eight from the first night. Two-thirds 
of us gone in a day and a half. That must be some 
kind of record. 



325 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"They're really burning through us," says Johanna. 
"Who's left? Besides us five and District Two?" asks 
Finnick. 

"Chaff," says Peeta, without needing to think about it. 
Perhaps he's been keeping an eye out for him because 
of Haymitch. 

A parachute comes down with a pile of bite-sized 
square-shaped rolls. "These are from your district, 
right, Beetee?" Peeta asks. 

"Yes, from District Three," he says. "How many are 
there?" 

Finnick counts them, turning each one over in his 
hands before he sets it in a neat configuration. I don't 
know what it is with Finnick and bread, but he seems 
obsessed with handling it. "Twenty-four," he says. 

"An even two dozen, then?" says Beetee. 

"Twenty-four on the nose," says Finnick. "How should 
we divide them?" 

"Let's each have three, and whoever is still alive at 
breakfast can take a vote on the rest," says Johanna. 
I don't know why this makes me laugh a little. I guess 
because it's true. When I do, Johanna gives me a look 
that's almost approving. No, not approving. But 
maybe slightly pleased. 

We wait until the giant wave has flooded out of the 
ten-to-eleven-o'clock section, wait for the water to 
recede, and then go to that beach to make camp. 
Theoretically, we should have a full twelve hours of 
safety from the jungle. There's an unpleasant chorus 
of clicking, probably from some evil type of insect, 
coming from the eleven-to-twelve-o'clock wedge. But 



326 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



whatever is making the sound stays within the 
confines of the jungle and we keep off that part of the 
beach in case they're just waiting for a carelessly 
placed footfall to swarm out. 

I don't know how Johanna's still on her feet. She's 
only had about an hour of sleep since the Games 
started. Peeta and I volunteer for the first watch 
because we're better rested, and because we want 
some time alone. The others go out immediately, 
although Finnick's sleep is restless. Every now and 
then I hear him murmuring Annie's name. 

Peeta and I sit on the damp sand, facing away from 
each other, my right shoulder and hip pressed 
against his. I watch the water as he watches the 
jungle, which is better for me. I'm still haunted by the 
voices of the jabberjays, which unfortunately the 
insects can't drown out. After a while I rest my head 
against his shoulder. Feel his hand caress my hair. 

"Katniss," he says softly, "it's no use pretending we 
don't know what the other one is trying to do." No, I 
guess there isn't, but it's no fun discussing it, either. 
Well, not for us, anyway. The Capitol viewers will be 
glued to their sets so they don't miss one wretched 
word. 

"I don't know what kind of deal you think you've 
made with Haymitch, but you should know he made 
me promises as well." Of course, I know this, too. He 
told Peeta they could keep me alive so that he 
wouldn't be suspicious. "So I think we can assume he 
was lying to one of us." 

This gets my attention. A double deal. A double 
promise. With only Haymitch knowing which one is 
real. I raise my head, meet Peeta's eyes. "Why are you 
saying this now?" 

327 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Because I don't want you forgetting how different our 
circumstances are. If you die, and I live, there's no life 
for me at all back in District Twelve. You're my whole 
life," he says. "I would never be happy again." I start 
to object but he puts a finger to my lips. "It's different 
for you. I'm not saying it wouldn't be hard. But there 
are other people who'd make your life worth living." 

Peeta pulls the chain with the gold disk from around 
his neck. He holds it in the moonlight so I can clearly 
see the mockingjay. Then his thumb slides along a 
catch I didn't notice before and the disk pops open. 
It's not solid, as I had thought, but a locket. And 
within the locket are photos. On the right side, my 
mother and Prim, laughing. And on the left, Gale. 
Actually smiling. 

There is nothing in the world that could break me 
faster at this moment than these three faces. After 
what I heard this afternoon... it is the perfect weapon. 

"Your family needs you, Katniss," Peeta says. 

My family. My mother. My sister. And my pretend 
cousin Gale. But Peeta's intention is clear. That Gale 
really is my family, or will be one day, if I live. That 111 
marry him. So Peeta's giving me his life and Gale at 
the same time. To let me know I shouldn't ever have 
doubts about it. 

Everything. That's what Peeta wants me to take from 
him. 

I wait for him to mention the baby, to play to the 
cameras, but he doesn't. And that's how I know that 
none of this is part of the Games. That he is telling 
me the truth about what he feels. 



328 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"No one really needs me," he says, and there's no self- 
pity in his voice. It's true his family doesn't need him. 
They will mourn him, as will a handful of friends. But 
they will get on. Even Haymitch, with the help of a lot 
of white liquor, will get on. I realize only one person 
will be damaged beyond repair if Peeta dies. Me. 

"I do," I say. "I need you." He looks upset, takes a 
deep breath as if to begin a long argument, and that's 
no good, no good at all, because he'll start going on 
about Prim and my mother and everything and I'll 
just get confused. So before he can talk, I stop his lips 
with a kiss. 

I feel that thing again. The thing I only felt once 
before. In the cave last year, when I was trying to get 
Haymitch to send us food. I kissed Peeta about a 
thousand times during those Games and after. But 
there was only one kiss that made me feel something 
stir deep inside. Only one that made me want more. 
But my head wound started bleeding and he made me 
lie down. 

This time, there is nothing but us to interrupt us. 
And after a few attempts, Peeta gives up on talking. 
The sensation inside me grows warmer and spreads 
out from my chest, down through my body, out along 
my arms and legs, to the tips of my being. Instead of 
satisfying me, the kisses have the opposite effect, of 
making my need greater. I thought I was something of 
an expert on hunger, but this is an entirely new kind. 

It's the first crack of the lightning storm — the bolt 
hitting the tree at midnight — that brings us to our 
senses. It rouses Finnick as well. He sits up with a 
sharp cry. I see his fingers digging into the sand as he 
reassures himself that whatever nightmare he 
inhabited wasn't real. 



329 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"I can't sleep anymore," he says. "One of you should 
rest." Only then does he seem to notice our 
expressions, the way we're wrapped around each 
other. "Or both of you. I can watch alone." 

Peeta won't let him, though. "It's too dangerous," he 
says. "I'm not tired. You lie down, Katniss." I don't 
object because I do need to sleep if I'm to be of any 
use keeping him alive. I let him lead me over to where 
the others are. He puts the chain with the locket 
around my neck, then rests his hand over the spot 
where our baby would be. "You're going to make a 
great mother, you know," he says. He kisses me one 
last time and goes back to Finnick. 

His reference to the baby signals that our time-out 
from the Games is over. That he knows the audience 
will be wondering why he hasn't used the most 
persuasive argument in his arsenal. That sponsors 
must be manipulated. 

But as I stretch out on the sand I wonder, could it be 
more? Like a reminder to me that I could still one day 
have kids with Gale? Well, if that was it, it was a 
mistake. Because for one thing, that's never been part 
of my plan. 

And for another, if only one of us can be a parent, 
anyone can see it should be Peeta. 

As I drift off, I try to imagine that world, somewhere in 
the future, with no Games, no Capitol. A place like 
the meadow in the song I sang to Rue as she died. 
Where Peeta's child could be safe. 



330 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 




When I wake, I have a brief, delicious feeling of 
happiness that is somehow connected with Peeta. 
Happiness, of course, is a complete absurdity at this 
point, since at the rate things are going, 111 be dead in 
a day. And that's the best-case scenario, if I'm able to 
eliminate the rest of the field, including myself, and 
get Peeta crowned as the winner of the Quarter Quell. 
Still, the sensation's so unexpected and sweet I cling 
to it, if only for a few moments. Before the gritty sand, 
the hot sun, and my itching skin demand a return to 
reality. 

Everyone's already up and watching the descent of a 
parachute to the beach. I join them for another 
delivery of bread. It's identical to the one we received 
the night before. Twenty-four rolls from District 3. 
That gives us thirty-three in all. We each take five, 
leaving eight in reserve. No one says it, but eight will 
divide up perfectly after the next death. Somehow, in 
the light of day, joking about who will be around to 
eat the rolls has lost its humor. 

How long can we keep this alliance? I don't think 
anyone expected the number of tributes to drop so 
quickly. What if I am wrong about the others 
protecting Peeta? If things were simply coincidental, 
or it's all been a strategy to win our trust to make us 
easy prey, or I don't understand what's actually going 
on? Wait, there's no ifs about that. I don't understand 
what's going on. And if I don't, it's time for Peeta and 
me to clear out of here. 

I sit next to Peeta on the sand to eat my rolls. For 
some reason, it's difficult to look at him. Maybe it was 
all that kissing last night, although the two of us 
331 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



kissing isn't anything new. It might not even have felt 
any different for him. Maybe it's knowing the brief 
amount of time we have left. And how we're working 
at such cross-purposes when it comes to who should 
survive these Games. 

After we eat, I take his hand and tug him toward the 
water. "Come on. Ill teach you how to swim." I need 
to get him away from the others where we can discuss 
breaking away. It will be tricky, because once they 
realize we're severing the alliance, we'll be instant 
targets. 

If I was really teaching him to swim, I'd make him 
take off the belt since it keeps him afloat, but what 
does it matter now? So I just show him the basic 
stroke and let him practice going back and forth in 
waist-high water. At first, I notice Johanna keeping a 
careful eye on us, but eventually she loses interest 
and goes to take a nap. Finnick's weaving a new net 
out of vines and Beetee plays with his wire. I know 
the time has come. 

While Peeta has been swimming, I've discovered 
something. My remaining scabs are starting to peel 
off. By gently rubbing a handful of sand up and down 
my arm, I clean off the rest of the scales, revealing 
fresh new skin underneath. 

I stop Peeta's practice, on the pretext of showing him 
how to rid himself of the itchy scabs, and as we scrub 
ourselves, I bring up our escape. 

"Look, the pool is down to eight. I think it's time we 
took off," I say under my breath, although I doubt any 
of the tributes can hear me. 

Peeta nods, and I can see him considering my 
proposition. Weighing if the odds will be in our favor. 
332 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Tell you what," he says. "Let's stick around until 
Brutus and Enobaria are dead. I think Beetee's trying 
to put together some kind of trap for them now. Then, 
I promise, well go." 

I'm not entirely convinced. But if we leave now, we'll 
have two sets of adversaries after us. Maybe three, 
because who knows what Chaffs up to? Plus the 
clock to contend with. And then there's Beetee to 
think of. Johanna only brought him for me, and if we 
leave shell surely kill him. Then I remember. I can't 
protect Beetee, too. There can only be one victor and 
it has to be Peeta. I must accept this. I must make 
decisions based on his survival only. 

"All right," I say. "We'll stay until the Careers are 
dead. But that's the end of it." I turn and wave to 
Finnick. "Hey, Finnick, come on in! We figured out 
how to make you pretty again!" 

The three of us scour all the scabs from our bodies, 
helping with the others' backs, and come out the 
same pink as the sky. We apply another round of 
medicine because the skin seems too delicate for the 
sunlight, but it doesn't look half as bad on smooth 
skin and will be good camouflage in the jungle. 

Beetee calls us over, and it turns out that during all 
those hours of fiddling with wire, he has indeed come 
up with a plan. "I think well all agree our next job is 
to kill Brutus and Enobaria," he says mildly. "I doubt 
theyll attack us openly again, now that they're so 
outnumbered. We could track them down, I suppose, 
but it's dangerous, exhausting work." 

"Do you think they've figured out about the clock?" I 
ask. 



333 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"If they haven't, they'll figure it out soon enough. 
Perhaps not as specifically as we have. But they must 
know that at least some of the zones are wired for 
attacks and that they're reoccurring in a circular 
fashion. Also, the fact that our last fight was cut off 
by Gamemaker intervention will not have gone 
unnoticed by them. We know it was an attempt to 
disorient us, but they must be asking themselves why 
it was done, and this, too, may lead them to the 
realization that the arena's a clock," says Beetee. "So I 
think our best bet will be setting our own trap." 

"Wait, let me get Johanna up," says Finnick. "Shell 
be rabid if she thinks she missed something this 
important." 

"Or not," I mutter, since she's always pretty much 
rabid, but I don't stop him, because I'd be angry 
myself if I was excluded from a plan at this point. 

When she's joined us, Beetee shoos us all back a bit 
so he can have room to work in the sand. He swiftly 
draws a circle and divides it into twelve wedges. It's 
the arena, not rendered in-Peeta's precise strokes but 
in the rough lines of a man whose mind is occupied 
by other, far more complex things. "If you were 
Brutus and Enobaria, knowing what you do now 
about the jungle, where would you feel safest?" Beetee 
asks. There's nothing patronizing in his voice, and yet 
I can't help thinking he reminds me of a 
schoolteacher about to ease children into a lesson. 
Perhaps it's the age difference, or simply that Beetee 
is probably about a million times smarter than the 
rest of us. 

"Where we are now. On the beach," says Peeta. "It's 
the safest place." 

"So why aren't they on the beach?" says Beetee. 

334 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Because we're here," says Johanna impatiently. 

"Exactly. We're here, claiming the beach. Now where 
would you go?" says Beetee. 

I think about the deadly jungle, the occupied beach. 
"I'd hide just at the edge of the jungle. So I could 
escape if an attack came. And so I could spy on us." 

"Also to eat," Finnick says. "The jungle's full of 
strange creatures and plants. But by watching us, I'd 
know the seafood's safe." 

Beetee smiles at us as if we've exceeded his 
expectations. "Yes, good. You do see. Now here's what 
I propose: a twelve o'clock strike. What happens 
exactly at noon and at midnight?" 

"The lightning bolt hits the tree," I say. 

"Yes. So what I'm suggesting is that after the bolt hits 
at noon, but before it hits at midnight, we run my 
wire from that tree all the way down into the 
saltwater, which is, of course, highly conductive. 
When the bolt strikes, the electricity will travel down 
the wire and into not only the water but also the 
surrounding beach, which will still be damp from the 
ten o'clock wave. Anyone in contact with those 
surfaces at that moment will be electrocuted," says 
Beetee. 

There's a long pause while we all digest Beetee's plan. 
It seems a bit fantastical to me, impossible even. But 
why? I've set thousands of snares. Isn't this just a 
larger snare with a more scientific component? Could 
it work? How can we even question it, we tributes 
trained to gather fish and lumber and coal? What do 
we know about harnessing power from the sky? 



335 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Peeta takes a stab at it. "Will that wire really be able 
to conduct that much power, Beetee? It looks so 
fragile, like it would just burn up." 

"Oh, it will. But not until the current has passed 
through it. It will act something like a fuse, in fact. 
Except the electricity will travel along it," says Beetee. 

"How do you know?" asks Johanna, clearly not 
convinced. 

"Because I invented it," says Beetee, as if slightly 
surprised. "It's not actually wire in the usual sense. 
Nor is the lightning natural lightning nor the tree a 
real tree. You know trees better than any of us, 
Johanna. It would be destroyed by now, wouldn't it?" 

"Yes," she says glumly. 

"Don't worry about the wire — it will do just what I 
say," Beetee assures us. 

"And where will we be when this happens?" asks 
Finnick. 

"Far enough up in the jungle to be safe," Beetee 
replies. 

"The Careers will be safe, too, then, unless they're in 
the vicinity of the water," I point out. "That's right," 
says Beetee. 

"But all the seafood will be cooked," says Peeta. 

"Probably more than cooked," says Beetee. "We will 
most likely be eliminating that as a food source for 
good. But you found other edible things in the jungle, 
right, Katniss?" 



336 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Yes. Nuts and rats," I say. "And we have sponsors." 

"Well, then. I don't see that as a problem," says 
Beetee. "But as we are allies and this will require all 
our efforts, the decision of whether or not to attempt 
it is up to you four." 

We are like schoolchildren. Completely unable to 
dispute his theory with anything but the most 
elementary concerns. Most of which don't even have 
anything to do with his actual plan. I look at the 
others' disconcerted faces. "Why not?" I say. "If it 
fails, there's no harm done. If it works, there's a 
decent chance well kill them. And even if we don't 
and just kill the seafood, Brutus and Enobaria lose it 
as a food source, too." 

"I say we try it," says Peeta. "Katniss is right." 

Finnick looks at Johanna and raises his eyebrows. He 
will not go forward without her. "All right," she says 
finally. "It's better than hunting them down in the 
jungle, anyway. And I doubt they'll figure out our 
plan, since we can barely understand it ourselves." 

Beetee wants to inspect the lightning tree before he 
has to rig it. Judging by the sun, it's about nine in the 
morning. We have to leave our beach soon, anyway. 
So we break camp, walk over to the beach that 
borders the lightning section, and head into the 
jungle. Beetee 's still too weak to hike up the slope on 
his own, so Finnick and Peeta take turns carrying 
him. I let Johanna lead because it's a pretty straight 
shot up to the tree, and I figure she can't get us too 
lost. Besides, I can do a lot more damage with a 
sheath of arrows than she can with two axes, so I'm 
the best one to bring up the rear. 



337 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



The dense, muggy air weighs on me. There's been no 
break from it since the Games began. I wish 
Haymitch would stop sending us that District 3 bread 
and get us some more of that District 4 stuff, because 
I've sweated out buckets in the last two days, and 
even though I've had the fish, I'm craving salt. A piece 
of ice would be another good idea. Or a cold drink of 
water. I'm grateful for the fluid from the trees, but it's 
the same temperature as the seawater and the air 
and the other tributes and me. We're all just one big, 
warm stew. 

As we near the tree, Finnick suggests I take the lead. 
"Katniss can hear the force field," he explains to 
Beetee and Johanna. 

"Hear it?" asks Beetee. 

"Only with the ear the Capitol reconstructed," I say. 
Guess who I'm not fooling with that story? Beetee. 
Because surely he remembers that he showed me 
how to spot a force field, and probably it's impossible 
to hear force fields, anyway. But, for whatever reason, 
he doesn't question my claim. 

"Then by all means, let Katniss go first," he says, 
pausing a moment to wipe the steam off his glasses. 
"Force fields are nothing to play around with." 

The lightning tree's unmistakable as it towers so high 
above the others. I find a bunch of nuts and make 
everybody wait while I move slowly up the slope, 
tossing the nuts ahead of me. But I see the force field 
almost immediately, even before a nut hits it, because 
it's only about fifteen yards away. My eyes, which are 
sweeping the greenery before me, catch sight of the 
rippled square high up and to my right. I throw a nut 
directly in front of me and hear it sizzle in 
confirmation. 



338 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"Just stay below the lightning tree," I tell the others. 

We divide up duties. Finnick guards Beetee while he 
examines the tree, Johanna taps for water, Peeta 
gathers nuts, and I hunt nearby. The tree rats don't 
seem to have any fear of humans, so I take down 
three easily. The sound of the ten o'clock wave 
reminds me I should get back, and I return to the 
others and clean my kill. Then I draw a line in the dirt 
a few feet from the force field as a reminder to keep 
back, and Peeta and I settle down to roast nuts and 
sear cubes of rat. 

Beetee is still messing around the tree, doing I don't 
know what, taking measurements and such. At one 
point he snaps off a sliver of bark, joins us, and 
throws it against the force field. It bounces back and 
lands on the ground, glowing. In a few moments it 
returns to its original color. "Well, that explains a lot," 
says Beetee. I look at Peeta and can't help biting my 
lip to keep from laughing since it explains absolutely 
nothing to anyone but Beetee. 

About this time we hear the sound of clicks rising 
from the sector adjacent to us. That means it's eleven 
o'clock. It's far louder in the jungle than it was on the 
beach last night. We all listen intently. 

"It's not mechanical," Beetee says decidedly. 

"I'd guess insects," I say. "Maybe beetles." 

"Something with pincers," adds Finnick. 

The sound swells, as if alerted by our quiet words to 
the proximity of live flesh. Whatever is making that 
clicking, I bet it could strip us to the bone in seconds. 



339 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"We should get out of here, anyway," says Johanna. 
"There's less than an hour before the lightning 
starts." 



We don't go that far, though. Only to the identical tree 
in the blood-rain section. We have a picnic of sorts, 
squatting on the ground, eating our jungle food, 
waiting for the bolt that signals noon. At Beetee's 
request, I climb up into the canopy as the clicking 
begins to fade out. When the lightning strikes, it's 
dazzling, even from here, even in this bright sunlight. 
It completely encompasses the distant tree, making it 
glow a hot blue-white and causing the surrounding 
air to crackle with electricity. I swing down and report 
my findings to Beetee, who seems satisfied, even if I'm 
not terribly scientific. 

We take a circuitous route back to the ten o'clock 
beach. The sand is smooth and damp, swept clean by 
the recent wave. Beetee essentially gives us the 
afternoon off while he works with the wire. Since it's 
his weapon and the rest of us have to defer to his 
knowledge so entirely, there's the odd feeling of being 
let out of school early. At first we take turns having 
naps in the shadowy edge of the jungle, but by late 
afternoon everyone is awake and restless. We decide, 
since this might be our last chance for seafood, to 
make a sort of feast of it. Under Finnick's guidance 
we spear fish and gather shellfish, even dive for 
oysters. I like this last part best, not because I have 
any great appetite for oysters. I only ever tasted them 
once, in the Capitol, and I couldn't get around the 
sliminess. But it's lovely, deep down under the water, 
like being in a different world. The water's very clear, 
and schools of bright-hued fish and strange sea 
flowers decorate the sand floor. 

Johanna keeps watch while Finnick, Peeta, and I 
clean and lay out the seafood. Peeta's just pried open 



340 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



an oyster when I hear him give a laugh. "Hey, look at 
this!" He holds up a glistening, perfect pearl about the 
size of a pea. "You know, if you put enough pressure 
on coal it turns to pearls," he says earnestly to 
Finnick. 

"No, it doesn't," says Finnick dismissively. But I crack 
up, remembering that's how a clueless Effie Trinket 
presented us to the people of the Capitol last year, 
before anyone knew us. As coal pressured into pearls 
by our weighty existence. Beauty that arose out of 
pain. 

Peeta rinses the pearl off in the water and hands it to 
me. "For you." I hold it out on my palm and examine 
its iridescent surface in the sunlight. Yes, I will keep 
it. For the few remaining hours of my life I will keep it 
close. This last gift from Peeta. The only one I can 
really accept. Perhaps it will give me strength in the 
final moments. 

"Thanks," I say, closing my fist around it. I look coolly 
into the blue eyes of the person who is now my 
greatest opponent, the person who would keep me 
alive at his own expense. And I promise myself I will 
defeat his plan. 

The laughter drains from those eyes, and they are 
staring so intensely into mine, it's like they can read 
my thoughts. "The locket didn't work, did it?" Peeta 
says, even though Finnick is right there. Even though 
everyone can hear him. "Katniss?" 

"It worked," I say. 

"But not the way I wanted it to," he says, averting his 
glance. After that he will look at nothing but oysters. 



341 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Just as we're about to eat, a parachute appears 
bearing two supplements to our meal. A small pot of 
spicy red sauce and yet another round of rolls from 
District 3. Finnick, of course, immediately counts 
them. "Twenty-four again," he says. 

Thirty-two rolls, then. So we each take five, leaving 
seven, which will never divide equally. It's bread for 
only one. 

The salty fish flesh, the succulent shellfish. Even the 
oysters seem tasty, vastly improved by the sauce. We 
gorge ourselves until no one can hold another bite, 
and even then there are leftovers. They won't keep, 
though, so we toss all the remaining food back into 
the water so the Careers won't get it when we leave. 
No one bothers about the shells. The wave should 
clear those away. 

There's nothing to do now but wait. Peeta and I sit at 
the edge of the water, hand in hand, wordless. He 
gave his speech last night but it didn't change my 
mind, and nothing I can say will change his. The time 
for persuasive gifts is over. 

I have the pearl, though, secured in a parachute with 
the spile and the medicine at my waist. I hope it 
makes it back to District 12. 

Surely my mother and Prim will know to return it to 
Peeta before they bury my body. 



342 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



l6 

The anthem begins, but there are no faces in the sky 
tonight. The audience will be restless, thirsting for 
blood. Beetee's trap holds enough promise, though, 
that the Gamemakers haven't sent in other attacks. 
Perhaps they are simply curious to see if it will work. 

At what Finnick and I judge to be about nine, we 
leave our shell-strewn camp, cross to the twelve 
o'clock beach, and begin to quietly hike up to the 
lightning tree in the light of the moon. Our full 
stomachs make us more uncomfortable and 
breathless than we were on the morning's climb. I 
begin to regret those last dozen oysters. 

Beetee asks Finnick to assist him, and the rest of us 
stand guard. Before he even attaches any wire to the 
tree, Beetee unrolls yards and yards of the stuff. He 
has Finnick secure it tightly around a broken branch 
and lay it on the ground. Then they stand on either 
side of the tree, passing the spool back and forth as 
they wrap the wire around and around the trunk. At 
first it seems arbitrary, then I see a pattern, like an 
intricate maze, appearing in the moonlight on 
Beetee's side. I wonder if it makes any difference how 
the wire's placed, or if this is merely to add to the 
speculation of the audience. I bet most of them know 
as much about electricity as I do. 

The work on the trunk's completed just as we hear 
the wave begin. I've never really worked out at what 
point in the ten o'clock hour it erupts. There must be 
some buildup, then the wave itself, then the 
aftermath of the flooding. But the sky tells me ten- 
thirty. 




343 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



This is when Beetee reveals the rest of the plan. Since 
we move most swiftly through the trees, he wants 
Johanna and me to take the coil down through the 
jungle, unwinding the wire as we go. We are to lay it 
across the twelve o'clock beach and drop the metal 
spool, with whatever is left, deep into the water, 
making sure it sinks. Then run for the jungle. If we go 
now, right now, we should make it to safety. 

"I want to go with them as a guard," Peeta says 
immediately. After the moment with the pearl, I know 
he's less willing than ever to let me out of his sight. 

"You're too slow. Besides, 111 need you on this end. 
Katniss will guard," says Beetee. "There's no time to 
debate this. I'm sorry. If the girls are to get out of 
there alive, they need to move now." He hands the coil 
to Johanna. 

I don't like the plan any more than Peeta does. How 
can I protect him at a distance? But Beetee's right. 
With his leg, Peeta is too slow to make it down the 
slope in time. Johanna and I are the fastest and most 
sure-footed on the jungle floor. I can't think of any 
alternative. And if I trust anyone here besides Peeta, 
it's Beetee. 

"It's okay," I tell Peeta. "Well just drop the coil and 
come straight back up." 

"Not into the lightning zone," Beetee reminds me. 
"Head for the tree in the one-to-two-o'clock sector. If 
you find you're running out of time, move over one 
more. Don't even think about going back on the 
beach, though, until I can assess the damage." 

I take Peeta's face in my hands. "Don't worry. I'll see 
you at midnight." I give him a kiss and, before he can 



344 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



object any further, I let go and turn to Johanna. 
"Ready?" 

"Why not?" says Johanna with a shrug. She's clearly 
no happier about being teamed up than I am. But 
we're all caught up in Beetee's trap. "You guard, 111 
unwind. We can trade off later." 

Without further discussion, we head down the slope. 
In fact there's very little discussion between us at all. 
We move at a pretty good clip, one manning the coil, 
the other keeping watch. About halfway down, we 
hear the clicking beginning to rise, indicating it's after 
eleven. 

"Better hurry," Johanna says. "I want to put a lot of 
distance between me and that water before the 
lightning hits. Just in case Volts miscalculated 
something." 

"I'll take the coil for a while," I say. It's harder work 
laying out the wire than guarding, and she's had a 
long turn. 

"Here," Johanna says, passing me the coil. 

Both of our hands are still on the metal cylinder when 
there's a slight vibration. Suddenly the thin golden 
wire from above springs down at us, bunching in 
tangled loops and curls around our wrists. Then the 
severed end snakes up to our feet. 

It only takes a second to register this rapid turn of 
events. Johanna and I look at each other, but neither 
of us has to say it. Someone not far above us has cut 
the wire. And they will be on us at any moment. 

My hand frees itself from the wire and has just closed 
on the feathers of an arrow when the metal cylinder 



345 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



smashes into the side of my head. The next thing I 
know, I'm lying on my back in the vines, a terrible 
pain in my left temple. Something's wrong with my 
eyes. My vision blurs in and out of focus as I strain to 
make the two moons floating up in the sky into one. 
It's hard to breathe, and I realize Johanna's sitting on 
my chest, pinning me at the shoulders with her 
knees. 

There's a stab in my left forearm. I try to jerk away 
but I'm still too incapacitated. Johanna's digging 
something, I guess the point of her knife, into my 
flesh, twisting it around. There's an excruciating 
ripping sensation and warmth runs down my wrist, 
filling my palm. She swipes down my arm and coats 
half my face with my blood. 

"Stay down!" she hisses. Her weight leaves my body 
and I'm alone. 

Stay down? I think. What? What is happening? My 
eyes shut, blocking out the inconsistent world, as I 
try to make sense of my situation. 

All I can think of is Johanna shoving Wiress to the 
beach. "Just stay down, will you?" But she didn't 
attack Wiress. Not like this. I'm not Wiress, anyway. 
I'm not Nuts. "Just stay down, will you?" echoes 
around inside my brain. 

Footsteps coming. Two pairs. Heavy, not trying to 
conceal their whereabouts. 

Brutus's voice. "She's good as dead! Come on, 
Enobaria!" Feet moving into the night. 

Am I? I drift in and out of consciousness looking for 
an answer. Am I as good as dead? I'm in no position 
to make an argument to the contrary. In fact, rational 
346 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



thinking is a struggle. This much I know. Johanna 
attacked me. Smashed that cylinder into my head. 
Cut my arm, probably doing irreparable damage to 
veins and arteries, and then Brutus and Enobaria 
showed up before she had time to finish me off. 

The alliance is over. Finnick and Johanna must have 
had an agreement to turn on us tonight. I knew we 
should have left this morning. I don't know where 
Beetee stands. But I'm fair game, and so is Peeta. 

Peeta! My eyes fly open in panic. Peeta is waiting up 
by the tree, unsuspecting and off guard. Maybe 
Finnick has even killed him already. "No," I whisper. 
That wire was cut from a short distance away by the 
Careers. Finnick and Beetee and Peeta — they can't 
know what's going on down here. They can only be 
wondering what has happened, why the wire has gone 
slack or maybe even sprung back to the tree. This, in 
itself, can't be a signal to kill, can it? Surely this was 
just Johanna deciding the time had come to break 
with us. Kill me. Escape from the Careers. Then bring 
Finnick into the fight as soon as possible. 

I don't know. I don't know. I only know that I must 
get back to Peeta and keep him alive. It takes every 
ounce of will I have to push up into a sitting position 
and drag myself up the side of a tree to my feet. It's 
lucky I have something to hold on to because the 
jungle's tilting back and forth. Without any warning, I 
lean forward and vomit up the seafood feast, heaving 
until there can't possibly be an oyster left in my body. 
Trembling and slick with sweat, I assess my physical 
condition. 

As I lift up my damaged arm, blood sprays me in the 
face and the world makes another alarming shift. I 
squeeze my eyes shut and cling to the tree until 
things steady a little. Then I take a few careful steps 
347 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



to a neighboring tree, pull off some moss, and without 
examining the wound further, tightly bandage my 
arm. Better. Definitely better not to see it. Then I 
allow my hand to tentatively touch my head wound. 
There's a huge lump but not too much blood. 
Obviously I've got some internal damage, but I don't 
seem in danger of bleeding to death. At least not 
through my head. 

I dry my hands on moss and get a shaky grip on my 
bow with my damaged left arm. Secure the notch of 
an arrow to the string. Make my feet move up the 
slope. 

Peeta. My dying wish. My promise. To keep him alive. 
My heart lifts a bit when I realize he must be alive 
because no cannon has fired. Maybe Johanna was 
acting alone, knowing Finnick would side with her 
once her intentions were clear. Although it's hard to 
guess what goes on between those two. I think of how 
he looked to her for confirmation before he'd agree to 
help set Beetee's trap. There's a much deeper alliance 
based on years of friendship and who knows what 
else. Therefore, if Johanna has turned on me, I 
should no longer trust Finnick. 

I reach this conclusion only seconds before I hear 
someone running down the slope toward me. Neither 
Peeta nor Beetee could move at this pace. I duck 
behind a curtain of vines, concealing myself just in 
time. Finnick flies by me, his skin shadowy with 
medicine, leaping through the undergrowth like a 
deer. He soon reaches the sight of my attack, must 
see the blood. "Johanna! Katniss!" he calls. I stay put 
until he goes in the direction Johanna and the 
Careers took. 

I move as quickly as I can without sending the world 
into a whirl. My head throbs with the rapid beat of my 
348 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



heart. The insects, possibly excited by the smell of 
blood, have increased their clicking until it's a 
continuous roar in my ears. No, wait. Maybe my ears 
are actually ringing from the hit. Until the insects 
shut up, it will be impossible to tell. But when the 
insects go silent, the lightning will start. I have to 
move faster. I have to get to Peeta. 

The boom of a cannon pulls me up short. Someone 
has died. I know that with everyone running around 
armed and scared right now, it could be anybody. But 
whoever it is, I believe the death will trigger a kind of 
free-for-all out here in the night. People will kill first 
and wonder about their motives later. I force my legs 
into a run. 

Something snags my feet and I sprawl out on the 
ground. I feel it wrapping around me, entwining me in 
sharp fibers. A net! This must be one of Finnick's 
fancy nets, positioned to trap me, and he must be 
nearby, trident in hand. I flail around for a moment, 
only working the web more tightly around me, and 
then I catch a glimpse of it in the moonlight. 
Confused, I lift my arm and see it's entangled in 
shimmering golden threads. It's not one of Finnick's 
nets at all, but Beetee's wire. I carefully rise to my feet 
and find I'm in a patch of the stuff that caught on a 
trunk on its way back to the lightning tree. Slowly I 
disengage myself from the wire, step out of its reach, 
and continue uphill. 

On the good side, I'm on the right path and have not 
been so disoriented by the head injury as to lose my 
sense of direction. On the bad side, the wire has 
reminded me of the oncoming lightning storm. I can 
still hear the insects, but are they starting to fade? 

I keep the loops of wire a few feet to my left as a guide 

as I run but take great care not to touch them. If 

349 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



those insects are fading and the first bolt is about to 
strike the tree, then all its power will come surging 
down that wire and anyone in contact with it will die. 

The tree swims into view, its trunk festooned with 
gold. I slow down, try to move with some stealth, but 
I'm really just lucky to be upright. I look for a sign of 
the others. No one. No one is there. "Peeta?" I call 
softly. "Peeta?" 

A soft moan answers me and I whip around to find a 
figure lying higher up on the ground. "Beetee!" I 
exclaim. I hurry and kneel beside him. The moan 
must have been involuntary. He's not conscious, 
although I can see no wound except a gash below the 
crook of his elbow. I grab a nearby handful of moss 
and clumsily wrap it while I try to rouse him. "Beetee! 
Beetee, what's going on! Who cut you? Beetee!" I 
shake him in the way you should never shake an 
injured person, but I don't know what else to do. He 
moans again and briefly raises a hand to ward me off. 

This is when I notice he's holding a knife, one Peeta 
was carrying earlier, I think, which is wrapped loosely 
in wire. 

Perplexed, I stand and lift the wire, confirming it's 
attached back at the tree. It takes me a moment to 
remember the second, much shorter strand that 
Beetee wound around a branch and left on the 
ground before he even began his design on the tree. 
I'd thought it had some electrical significance, had 
been set aside to be used later. But it never was, 
because there's probably a good twenty, twenty-five 
yards here. 

I squint hard up the hill and realize we're only a few 
paces from the force field. There's the telltale square, 
high up and to my right, just as it was this morning. 
350 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



What did Beetee do? Did he actually try to drive the 
knife into the force field the way Peeta did by 
accident? And what's the deal with the wire? Was this 
his backup plan? If electrifying the water failed, did 
he mean to send the lightning bolt's energy into the 
force field? What would that do, anyway? Nothing? A 
great deal? Fry us all? The force field must mostly be 
energy, too, I guess. The one in the Training Center 
was invisible. This one seems to somehow mirror the 
jungle. But I've seen it falter when Peeta's knife 
struck it and when my arrows hit. The real world lies 
right behind it. 

My ears are not ringing. It was the insects after all. I 
know that now because they are dying out quickly 
and I hear nothing but the jungle sounds. Beetee is 
useless. I can't rouse him. I can't save him. I don't 
know what he was trying to do with the knife and the 
wire and he's incapable of explaining. The moss 
bandage on my arm is soaked and there's no use 
fooling myself. I'm so light-headed I'll black out in a 
matter of minutes. I've got to get away from this tree 
and — 

"Katniss!" I hear his voice though he's a far distance 
away. But what is he doing? Peeta must have figured 
out that everyone is hunting us by now. "Katniss!" 

I can't protect him. I can't move fast or far and my 
shooting abilities are questionable at best. I do the 
one thing I can to draw the attackers away from him 
and over to me. "Peeta!" I scream out. "Peeta! I'm 
here! Peeta!" Yes, I will draw them in, any in my 
vicinity, away from Peeta and over to me and the 
lightning tree that will soon be a weapon in and of 
itself. "I'm here! I'm here!" He won't make it. Not with 
that leg in the night. He will never make it in time. 
"Peeta!" 



351 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



It's working. I can hear them coming. Two of them. 
Crashing through the jungle. My knees start to give 
out and I sink down next to Beetee, resting my weight 
on my heels. My bow and arrow lift into position. If I 
can take them out, will Peeta survive the rest? 

Enobaria and Finnick reach the lightning tree. They 
can't see me, sitting above them on the slope, my skin 
camouflaged in ointment. I home in on Enobaria's 
neck. With any luck, when I kill her, Finnick will 
duck behind the tree for cover just as the lightning 
bolt strikes. And it will be any second. There's only a 
faint insect click here and there. I can kill them now. I 
can kill them both. 

Another cannon. 

"Katniss!" Peeta's voice howls for me. But this time I 
don't answer. Beetee still breathes faintly beside me. 
He and I will soon die. Finnick and Enobaria will die. 
Peeta is alive. Two cannons have sounded. Brutus, 
Johanna, Chaff. Two of them are already dead. That 
will leave Peeta with only one tribute to kill. And that 
is the very best I can do. One enemy. 

Enemy. Enemy. The word is tugging at a recent 
memory. Pulling it into the present. The look on 
Haymitch's face. "Katniss, when you're in the arena..." 
The scowl, the misgiving. "What?" I hear my own 
voice tighten as I bristle at some unspoken 
accusation. "You just remember who the enemy is," 
Haymitch says. "That's all." 

Haymitch's last words of advice to me. Why would I 
need reminding? I have always known who the enemy 
is. Who starves and tortures and kills us in the arena. 
Who will soon kill everyone I love. 



352 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



My bow drops as his meaning registers. Yes, I know 
who the enemy is. And it's not Enobaria. 

I finally see Beetee's knife with clear eyes. My shaking 
hands slide the wire from the hilt, wind it around the 
arrow just above the feathers, and secure it with a 
knot picked up in training. 

I rise, turning to the force field, fully revealing myself 
but no longer caring. Only caring about where I 
should direct my tip, where Beetee would have driven 
the knife if he'd been able to choose. My bow tilts up 
at the wavering square, the flaw, the... what did he 
call it that day? The chink in the armor. I let the 
arrow fly, see it hit its mark and vanish, pulling the 
thread of gold behind it. 

My hair stands on end and the lightning strikes the 
tree. 

A flash of white runs up the wire, and for just a 
moment, the dome bursts into a dazzling blue light. 
I'm thrown backward to the ground, body useless, 
paralyzed, eyes frozen wide, as feathery bits of matter 
rain down on me. I can't reach Peeta. I can't even 
reach my pearl. My eyes strain to capture one last 
image of beauty to take with me. 

Right before the explosions begin, I find a star. 



353 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Everything seems to erupt at once. The earth 
explodes into showers of dirt and plant matter. Trees 
burst into flames. Even the sky fills with brightly 
colored blossoms of light. I can't think why the sky's 
being bombed until I realize the Gamemakers are 
shooting off fireworks up there, while the real 
destruction occurs on the ground. Just in case it's 
not enough fun watching the obliteration of the arena 
and the remaining tributes. Or perhaps to illuminate 
our gory ends. 

Will they let anyone survive? Will there be a victor of 
the Seventy-fifth Hunger Games? Maybe not. After all, 
what is this Quarter Quell but... what was it 
President Snow read from the card? 

"...a reminder to the rebels that even the strongest 
among them cannot overcome the power of the 
Capitol. . . " 

Not even the strongest of the strong will triumph. 
Perhaps they never intended to have a victor in these 
Games at all. Or perhaps my final act of rebellion 
forced their hand. 

I'm sorry, Peeta, I think. I'm sorry I couldn't save you. 
Save him? More likely I stole his last chance at life, 
condemned him, by destroying the force field. Maybe, 
if we had all played by the rules, they might have let 
him live. 

The hovercraft materializes above me without 
warning. If it was quiet, and a mockingjay perched 
close at hand, I would have heard the jungle go silent 
and then the bird's call that precedes the appearance 
354 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



of the Capitol's aircraft. But my ears could never 
make out anything so delicate in this bombardment. 



The claw drops from the underside until it's directly 
overhead. The metal talons slide under me. I want to 
scream, run, smash my way out of it but I'm frozen, 
helpless to do anything but fervently hope I'll die 
before I reach the shadowy figures awaiting me above. 
They have not spared my life to crown me victor but 
to make my death as slow and public as possible. 

My worst fears are confirmed when the face that 
greets me inside the hovercraft belongs to Plutarch 
Heavensbee, Head Gamemaker. What a mess I have 
made of his beautiful Games with the clever ticking 
clock and the field of victors. He will suffer for his 
failure, probably lose his life, but not before he sees 
me punished. His hand reaches for me, I think to 
strike me, but he does something worse. With his 
thumb and his forefinger, he slides my eyelids shut, 
sentencing me to the vulnerability of darkness. They 
can do anything to me now and I will not even see it 
coming. 

My heart pounds so hard the blood begins to stream 
from beneath my soaked moss bandage. My thoughts 
grow foggy. Possibly I can bleed to death before they 
can revive me after all. In my mind, I whisper a 
thank-you to Johanna Mason for the excellent wound 
she inflicted as I black out. 

When I swim back into semi consciousness, I can feel 
I'm lying on a padded table. There's the pinching 
sensation of tubes in my left arm. They are trying to 
keep me alive because, if I slide quietly, privately into 
death, it will be a victory. I'm still largely unable to 
move, open my eyelids, raise my head. But my right 
arm has regained a little motion. It flops across my 
body, feeling like a flipper, no, something less 



355 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



animated, like a club. I have no real motor 
coordination, no proof that I even still have fingers. 
Yet I manage to swing my arm around until I rip the 
tubes out. A beeping goes off but I can't stay awake to 
find out who it will summon. 

The next time I surface, my hands are tied down to 
the table, the tubes back in my arm. I can open my 
eyes and lift my head slightly, though. I'm in a large 
room with low ceilings and a silvery light. There are 
two rows of beds facing each other. I can hear the 
breathing of what I assume are my fellow victors. 
Directly across from me I see Beetee with about ten 
different machines hooked up to him. Just let us die! I 
scream in my mind. I slam my head back hard on the 
table and go out again. 

When I finally, truly, wake up, the restraints are gone. 
I raise my hand and find I have fingers that can move 
at my command again. I push myself to a sitting 
position and hold on to the padded table until the 
room settles into focus. My left arm is bandaged but 
the tubes dangle off stands by the bed. 

I'm alone except for Beetee, who still lies in front of 
me, being sustained by his army of machines. Where 
are the others, then? Peeta, Finnick, Enobaria, and... 
and... one more, right? Either Johanna or Chaff or 
Brutus was still alive when the bombs began. I'm sure 
they'll want to make an example of us all. But where 
have they taken them? Moved them from hospital to 
prison? 

"Peeta..." I whisper. I so wanted to protect him. Am 
still resolved to. Since I have failed to keep him safe in 
life, I must find him, kill him now before the Capitol 
gets to choose the agonizing means of his death. I 
slide my legs off the table and look around for a 
weapon. There are a few syringes sealed in sterile 
356 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



plastic on a table near Beetee's bed. Perfect. All I'll 
need is air and a clear shot at one of his veins. 



I pause for a moment, consider killing Beetee. But if I 
do, the monitors will start beeping and I'll be caught 
before I get to Peeta. I make a silent promise to return 
and finish him off if I can. 

I'm naked except for a thin nightgown, so I slip the 
syringe under the bandage that covers the wound on 
my arm. There are no guards at the door. No doubt 
I'm miles beneath the Training Center or in some 
Capitol stronghold, and the possibility of my escape is 
nonexistent. It doesn't matter. I'm not escaping, just 
finishing a job. 

I creep down a narrow hallway to a metal door that 
stands slightly ajar. Someone is behind it. I take out 
the syringe and grip it in my hand. Flattening myself 
against the wall, I listen to the voices inside. 

"Communications are down in Seven, Ten, and 
Twelve. But Eleven has control of transportation now, 
so there's at least a hope of them getting some food 
out." 

Plutarch Heavensbee. I think. Although I've only 
really spoken with him once. A hoarse voice asks a 
question. 

"No, I'm sorry. There's no way I can get you to Four. 
But I've given special orders for her retrieval if 
possible. It's the best I can do, Finnick." 

Finnick. My mind struggles to make sense of the 
conversation, of the fact that it's taking place between 
Plutarch Heavensbee and Finnick. Is he so near and 
dear to the Capitol that he'll be excused his crimes? 
Or did he really have no idea what Beetee intended? 



357 I P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



He croaks out something else. Something heavy with 
despair. 

"Don't be stupid. That's the worst thing you could do. 
Get her killed for sure. As long as you're alive, they 11 
keep her alive for bait," says Haymitch. 

Says Haymitch! I bang through the door and stumble 
into the room. Haymitch, Plutarch, and a very beat- 
up Finnick sit around a table laid with a meal no one 
is eating. Daylight streams in the curved windows, 
and in the distance I see the top of a forest of trees. 
We are flying. 

"Done knocking yourself out, sweetheart?" says 
Haymitch, the annoyance clear in his voice. But as I 
careen forward he steps up and catches my wrists, 
steadying me. He looks at my hand. "So it's you and a 
syringe against the Capitol? See, this is why no one 
lets you make the plans." I stare at him 
uncomprehendingly. "Drop it." I feel the pressure 
increase on my right wrist until my hand is forced to 
open and I release the syringe. He settles me in a 
chair next to Finnick. 

Plutarch puts a bowl of broth in front of me. A roll. 
Slips a spoon into my hand. "Eat," he says in a much 
kinder voice than Haymitch used. 

Haymitch sits directly in front of me. "Katniss, I'm 
going to explain what happened. I don't want you to 
ask any questions until I'm through. Do you 
understand?" 

I nod numbly. And this is what he tells me. 

There was a plan to break us out of the arena from 
the moment the Quell was announced. The victor 
tributes from 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 1 1 had varying degrees 



358 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



of knowledge about it. Plutarch Heavensbee has been, 
for several years, part of an undercover group aiming 
to overthrow the Capitol. He made sure the wire was 
among the weapons. Beetee was in charge of blowing 
a hole in the force field. The bread we received in the 
arena was code for the time of the rescue. The district 
where the bread originated indicated the day. Three. 
The number of rolls the hour. Twenty-four. The 
hovercraft belongs to District 13. Bonnie and Twill, 
the women I met in the woods from 8, were right 
about its existence and its defense capabilities. We 
are currently on a very roundabout journey to District 
13. Meanwhile, most of the districts in Panem are in 
full-scale rebellion. 

Haymitch stops to see if I am following. Or maybe he 
is done for the moment. 

It's an awful lot to take in, this elaborate plan in 
which I was a piece, just as I was meant to be a piece 
in the Hunger Games. Used without consent, without 
knowledge. At least in the Hunger Games, I knew I 
was being played with. 

My supposed friends have been a lot more secretive. 

"You didn't tell me." My voice is as ragged as 
Finnick's. 

"Neither you nor Peeta were told. We couldn't risk it," 
says Plutarch. "I was even worried you might mention 
my indiscretion with the watch during the Games." 
He pulls out his pocket watch and runs his thumb 
across the crystal, lighting up the mockingjay. "Of 
course, when I showed you this, I was merely tipping 
you off about the arena. As a mentor. I thought it 
might be a first step toward gaining your trust. I 
never dreamed you'd be a tribute again." 



359 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



"I still don't understand why Peeta and I weren't let in 
on the plan," I say. 

"Because once the force field blew, you'd be the first 
ones they'd try to capture, and the less you knew, the 
better," says Haymitch. 

"The first ones? Why?" I say, trying to hang on to the 
train of thought. 

"For the same reason the rest of us agreed to die to 
keep you alive," says Finnick. 

"No, Johanna tried to kill me," I say. 

"Johanna knocked you out to cut the tracker from 
your arm and lead Brutus and Enobaria away from 
you," says Haymitch. 

"What?" My head aches so and I want them to stop 
talking in circles. "I don't know what you're — " 

"We had to save you because you're the mockingjay, 
Katniss," says Plutarch. "While you live, the 
revolution lives." 

The bird, the pin, the song, the berries, the watch, the 
cracker, the dress that burst into flames. I am the 
mockingjay. 

The one that survived despite the Capitol's plans. The 
symbol of the rebellion. 

It's what I suspected in the woods when I found 
Bonnie and Twill escaping. Though I never really 
understood the magnitude. But then, I wasn't meant 
to understand. I think of Haymitch 's sneering at my 
plans to flee District 12, start my own uprising, even 
the very notion that District 13 could exist. 



360 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



Subterfuges and deceptions. And if he could do that, 
behind his mask of sarcasm and drunkenness, so 
convincingly and for so long, what else has he lied 
about? I know what else. 

"Peeta," I whisper, my heart sinking. 

"The others kept Peeta alive because if he died, we 
knew there 'd be no keeping you in an alliance," says 
Haymitch. "And we couldn't risk leaving you 
unprotected." His words are matter-of-fact, his 
expression unchanged, but he can't hide the tinge of 
gray that colors his face. 

"Where is Peeta?" I hiss at him. 

"He was picked up by the Capitol along with Johanna 
and Enobaria," says Haymitch. And finally he has the 
decency to drop his gaze. 

Technically, I am unarmed. But no one should ever 
underestimate the harm that fingernails can do, 
especially if the target is unprepared. I lunge across 
the table and rake mine down Haymitch's face, 
causing blood to flow and damage to one eye. Then we 
are both screaming terrible, terrible things at each 
other, and Finnick is trying to drag me out, and I 
know it's all Haymitch can do not to rip me apart, but 
I'm the mockingjay. I'm the mockingjay and it's too 
hard keeping me alive as it is. 

Other hands help Finnick and I'm back on my table, 
my body restrained, my wrists tied down, so I slam 
my head in fury again and again against the table. A 
needle pokes my arm and my head hurts so badly I 
stop fighting and simply wail in a horrible, dying- 
animal way, until my voice gives out. 



361 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



The drug causes sedation, not sleep, so I am trapped 
in fuzzy, dully aching misery for what seems like 
always. They reinsert their tubes and talk to me in 
soothing voices that never reach me. All I can think of 
is Peeta, lying on a similar table somewhere, while 
they try to break him for information he doesn't even 
have. 

"Katniss. Katniss, I'm sorry." Finnick's voice comes 
from the bed next to me and slips into my 
consciousness. Perhaps because we're in the same 
kind of pain. "I wanted to go back for him and 
Johanna, but I couldn't move." 

I don't answer. Finnick Odair's good intentions mean 
less than nothing. 

"It's better for him than Johanna. They'll figure out he 
doesn't know anything pretty fast. And they won't kill 
him if they think they can use him against you," says 
Finnick. 

"Like bait?" I say to the ceiling. "Like how theyll use 
Annie for bait, Finnick?" 

I can hear him weeping but I don't care. They 
probably won't even bother to question her, she's so 
far gone. Gone right off the deep end years ago in her 
Games. There's a good chance I'm headed in the same 
direction. Maybe I'm already going crazy and no one 
has the heart to tell me. I feel crazy enough. 

"I wish she was dead," he says. "I wish they were all 
dead and we were, too. It would be best." 

Well, there's no good response to that. I can hardly 
dispute it since I was walking around with a syringe 
to kill Peeta when I found them. Do I really want him 
dead? What I want... what I want is to have him back. 



362 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



But I'll never get him back now. Even if the rebel 
forces could somehow overthrow the Capitol, you can 
be sure President Snow's last act would be to cut 
Peeta's throat. No. I will never get him back. So then 
dead is best. 

But will Peeta know that or will he keep fighting? He's 
so strong and such a good liar. Does he think he has 
a chance of surviving? Does he even care if he does? 
He wasn't planning on it, anyway. He had already 
signed off on life. Maybe, if he knows I was rescued, 
he's even happy. Feels he fulfilled his mission to keep 
me alive. 

I think I hate him even more than I do Haymitch. 

I give up. Stop speaking, responding, refuse food and 
water. They can pump whatever they want into my 
arm, but it takes more than that to keep a person 
going once she's lost the will to live. I even have a 
funny notion that if I do die, maybe Peeta will be 
allowed to live. Not as a free person but as an Avox or 
something, waiting on the future tributes of District 
12. Then maybe he could find some way to escape. 
My death could, in fact, still save him. 

If it can't, no matter. It's enough to die of spite. To 
punish Haymitch, who, of all the people in this rotting 
world, has turned Peeta and me into pieces in his 
Games. I trusted him. I put what was precious in 
Haymitch 's hands. And he has betrayed me. 

"See, this is why no one lets you make the plans, " he 
said. 

That's true. No one in their right mind would let me 
make the plans. Because I obviously can't tell a friend 
from an enemy. 



363 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



A lot of people come by to talk to me, but I make all 
their words sound like the clicking of the insects in 
the jungle. Meaningless and distant. Dangerous, but 
only if approached. Whenever the words start to 
become distinct, I moan until they give me more 
painkiller and that fixes things right up. 

Until one time, I open my eyes and find someone I 
cannot block out looking down at me. Someone who 
will not plead, or explain, or think he can alter my 
design with entreaties, because he alone really knows 
how I operate. 

"Gale," I whisper. 

"Hey, Catnip." He reaches down and pushes a strand 
of hair out of my eyes. One side of his face has been 
burned fairly recently. His arm is in a sling, and I can 
see bandages under his miner's shirt. What has 
happened to him? How is he even here? Something 
very bad has happened back home. 

It is not so much a question of forgetting Peeta as 
remembering the others. All it takes is one look at 
Gale and they come surging into the present, 
demanding to be acknowledged. 

"Prim?" I gasp. 

"She's alive. So is your mother. I got them out in 
time," he says. 

"They're not in District Twelve?" I ask. 

"After the Games, they sent in planes. Dropped 
firebombs." He hesitates. "Well, you know what 
happened to the Hob." 



364 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



I do know. I saw it go up. That old warehouse 
embedded with coal dust. The whole district's covered 
with the stuff. A new kind of horror begins to rise up 
inside me as I imagine firebombs hitting the Seam. 

"They're not in District Twelve?" I repeat. As if saying 
it will somehow fend off the truth. 

"Katniss," Gale says softly. 

I recognize that voice. It's the same one he uses to 
approach wounded animals before he delivers a 
deathblow. I instinctively raise my hand to block his 
words but he catches it and holds on tightly. 

"Don't," I whisper. 

But Gale is not one to keep secrets from me. "Katniss, 
there is no District Twelve." 



365 | P a g e 



Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



END OF BOOK TWO 



366 | P a g e Catching Fire - Suzanne Collins 



